1. Tijdschr Diergeneeskd. 2000 Dec 15;125(24):752.

[Follicular conjuctivitis].

[Article in Dutch]

Stades FC.

PMID: 11189907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol. 2008 Apr;4(4):507-11. doi: 
10.1517/17425255.4.4.507.

Ketorolac tromethamine 0.4% as a treatment for allergic conjuctivitis.

Schechter BA(1).

Author information:
(1)Florida Eye Microsurgical Institute, 1717 W Woolbright Road, Boynton Beach, 
FL 33426, USA. BDSCH77@aol.com

BACKGROUND: Acular LS (ketorolac tromethamine 0.4%) ophthalmic solution, a 
reformulation of the original Acular (ketorolac tromethamine 0.5%), is indicated 
for the reduction of ocular pain and burning/stinging following corneal 
refractive surgery.
OBJECTIVE: This manuscript will review the off-label application of this topical 
NSAID medication as a treatment for allergic conjunctivitis.
METHODS: An extensive MedLine search was undertaken to evaluate data on the use 
of ketorolac for allergic conjunctivitis. Data on both human and animal data 
were reviewed.
RESULTS/CONCLUSIONS: Studies have demonstrated that ketorolac 0.4% has 
equivalent efficacy to ketorolac 0.5%. Several studies have demonstrated that 
ketorolac effectively treats allergic conjunctivitis. Ketorolac 0.4% is 
effective when used as either monotherapy or as adjunct therapy to steroids.

DOI: 10.1517/17425255.4.4.507
PMID: 18433352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Am J Ophthalmol. 1977 Oct;84(4):563-6. doi: 10.1016/0002-9394(77)90453-6.

Conjuctivitis and keratoconjunctivitis associated with primary immunodeficiency 
diseases.

Franklin RM, Winkelstein JA, Seto DS.

Nineteen patients with a variety of well-defined primary immunodeficiency 
diseases were examined for ocular abnormalities. Eight patients with low levels, 
or absence, of all the major serum immunoglobulins had conjunctivitis or 
keratoconjunctivitis associated with bacterial infection. The remaining 11 
patients, who had at least one immunoglobulin class present in normal 
concentration in the serum, showed no inflammatory ocular lesion. Absence of 
only IgA, the major tear immunoglobulin, did not predispose the eye to these 
lesions.

DOI: 10.1016/0002-9394(77)90453-6
PMID: 333923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Nord Med. 1963 Jun 27;69:746-8.

[Conjuctivitis neonatorum].

[Article in Swedish]

BERGQVIST G.

PMID: 13970783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Am J Ophthalmol. 1955 Apr;39(4 Pt 1):540-7.

Change in the constitution with age; its influence on the clinical symptoms of 
conjuctivitis.

MITSUI Y, TANAKA C, YAMASHITA K.

PMID: 14361581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Anesth Analg (Paris). 1960 Jun-Aug;17:356-8.

[Post-operative conjuctivitis due to failure to close the eyelids].

[Article in French]

BAUMANN P.

PMID: 13687988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Klin Mikrobiol Infekc Lek. 2013 Sep;19(3):107-8.

[Primary meningococcal conjuctivitis with the development of a systemic 
disease].

[Article in Czech]

Petrousová L(1), Roznovský L(2).

Author information:
(1)Klinika infekcního lékarství, Fakultní nemocnice Ostrava. 
lenka.petrousova@gmail.com
(2)Klinika infekcního lékarství, Fakultní nemocnice Ostrava.

Neisseria meningitidis is a rare cause of acute bacterial conjunctivitis. 
Systemic meningococcal disease follows meningococcal conjunctivitis in 
approximately one quarter of patients. Systemic antibiotic treatment is 
indicated in the case of meningococcal conjunctivitis to prevent spread of 
infection. We report 6-month-old boy who presented with meningococcal 
conjunctivitis and developed sepsis and meningitis in 24 hours. The course of 
the disease was favorable.

PMID: 24579454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Nihon Ganka Kiyo. 1963 Oct;14:299.

[ACUTE CONJUCTIVITIS DUE TO STREPTOCOCCUS VIRIDANS].

[Article in Japanese]

UCHIDA Y, HIGAI H, TAKEBAYASHI M.

PMID: 14092690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Indian J Med Res. 1984 Jan;79:114-7.

Epidemic haemorrhagic conjuctivitis in a rural community of Goa.

Srinivasa DK, D'Souza V, Kamat GH, Zingde KD.

PMID: 6724645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Orv Hetil. 2001 Apr 15;142(15):771-3.

[Marijuana--2000].

[Article in Hungarian]

Bálint GS(1).

Author information:
(1)Szegedi Tudományegyetem, Altalános Orvostudományi Kar, Szent-Györgyi Albert 
Orvos- és Gyógyszerésztudományi Centrum, Pszichiátriai Klinika, Klinikai 
Farmakológiai Laboratórium.

Marihuana (Cannabis sativa, the hemp plant) is one of the most widely used 
illicit drugs all over the world. Cannabis products are usually smoked. The 
plant contains chemicals called cannabinoids. One of these, 
1-delta-9-tetrahydro-cannabinol (THC) is believed be responsible for most of the 
characteristic psychoactive (euphoria) and cardiovascular (tachycardia, 
conjuctivitis) effects. Although some clinical studies suggest the medical 
utility of marihuana (i.e. on the basis of its antiemetic, anticonvulsive and 
analgesic effect)--the scientific evidence is weak. Therefore the complete 
legalization of the drug is strongly opposed.

PMID: 11367861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Eye Ear Nose Throat Mon. 1959 Oct;38:850; passim.

VERNAL conjunctivitis.

[No authors listed]

PMID: 13857085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Med J Aust. 1948 May 15;1(20):621.

A case of primary meningococcal conjuctivitis.

LEWIS N, FERRIS AA.

PMID: 18938948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Immunol. 1973 Aug;111(2):618-23.

Immunity to chlamydial infections of the eye. 3. Presence and duration of 
delayed hypersensitivity to guinea pig inclusion conjuctivitis.

Watson RR, MacDonald AB, Murray ES, Modabber FZ.

PMID: 4736938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Immunol. 1967 Dec;99(6):1183-6.

Species-specific antigens from trachoma and inclusion-conjuctivitis (chlamydial) 
agents.

Vedros NA.

PMID: 6060969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1962 Mar 5;98:31-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1962.tb30528.x.

Seasonal insusceptibility of embryonated eggs to viruses of trachoma and 
inclusion conjuctivitis.

JAWETZ E.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1962.tb30528.x
PMID: 14451445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Fr Ophtalmol. 1985;8(8-9):573-8.

[N-acetyl-aspartylglutamic acid eye drops in allergic-type conjuctivitis. 
Double-blind comparative clinical study].

[Article in French]

Bonnet M, Ducournau D, Lumbroso P, Serpin G.

Fifty patients with allergic conjunctivitis were included in a double-blind 
randomized clinical trial designed to compare the efficiency and tolerance of 
two antiallergic eye-drops: one containing NAAGA (22 patients), the other one 
containing disodium Cromoglycate (28 patients). Both treatments were used at a 
dosage of 1 drop 4 times per day. Ocular symptoms, conjunctivo-corneal signs and 
the subjective ocular condition assessed by the patients themselves with visual 
analogue scales, were all significantly improved by both eye-drops during the 
first month of treatment. Statistical analysis showed that patient ocular 
condition improved more rapidly with NAAGA eye-drops. In 25 patients (12 in the 
NAAGA group and 13 in the Cromoglycate group), the study was continued for an 
additional month according to a cross-over protocol. During the 2nd month of 
treatment, additional improvement of ocular symptoms and signs were observed 
with both eye-drops but more markedly in those patients who received NAAGA after 
Cromoglycate. Ocular tolerance was good for both eye-drops.

PMID: 3936869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2000;(2):CD000133. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD000133.

Maternal antigen avoidance during pregnancy for preventing atopic disease in 
infants of women at high risk.

Kramer MS(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, McGill University, 1020 Pine Avenue West, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada, H3A 1A2. mikek@epid.lan.mcgill.ca

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003;(4):CD000133. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD000133.

OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects of prescribing an antigen avoidance diet 
during pregnancy on the nutritional status of the mother and newborn and on the 
development of atopic disease in the child. The main focus is on women at high 
risk for giving birth to an atopic child, based on a history of atopic disease 
in the mother, father, or a previous child.
SEARCH STRATEGY: The register of clinical trials maintained and updated by the 
Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth Group.
SELECTION CRITERIA: All acceptably controlled comparisons of maternal antigen 
avoidance prescribed to pregnant women at high risk, regardless of the degree of 
antigen avoidance (number of foods eliminated from the diet) or the time of its 
onset during pregnancy. Data are also included on formula-fed (ie non-breastfed) 
infants in trials of maternal antigen avoidance intended to continue beyond 
pregnancy into the lactation period.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Data were extracted by the author from published 
reports, and supplemented by additional information from trialists contacted by 
the author.
MAIN RESULTS: Three trials involving 504 women were included. Based on the 
single trial providing pertinent data, the restricted diet was associated with a 
small but statistically significant lower mean gestational weight gain (mean 
difference = -3.0% of prepregnancy weight) and a nonsignificantly higher risk of 
preterm birth. The combined evidence does not suggest a strong protective effect 
of maternal antigen avoidance on the incidence of atopic eczema or asthma during 
the first 12-18 months of life. Data on allergic rhinitis/conjuctivitis and 
urticaria are limited to a single trial each and are insufficient to draw 
meaningful inferences. Two trials suggest a lower incidence of skin prick tests 
to egg at 6 months of age, but the effect was no longer evident at 18 months, 
nor was any benefit apparent at either age for skin prick tests to milk. If 
anything, cord blood IgE levels were higher in the experimental (antigen 
avoidance) group.
REVIEWER'S CONCLUSIONS: Prescription of an antigen avoidance diet to a high-risk 
woman during pregnancy is unlikely to reduce substantially her risk of giving 
birth to an atopic child. Moreover, such a diet may have an adverse effect on 
maternal and/or fetal nutrition.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD000133
PMID: 10796150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Rinsho Ganka. 1962 May;16:559-64.

[Treatment of epidemic kerato-conjuctivitis with local instillation of 
convalescent serum].

[Article in Japanese]

SUDA E.

PMID: 13918126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Indian J Occup Environ Med. 2008 Apr;12(1):20-2. doi: 10.4103/0019-5278.40811.

Ocular myasis and associated mucopurulent conjuctivitis acquired occupationally: 
A case study.

Jayaprakash K, Karthikeyan A.

Ocular myasis and associated mucopurulent conjunctivitis in human eyes is a rare 
phenomenon. However, if the sheep bot fly abounds and poor hygienic environment 
prevails, the Oestrous ovis deposits its larvae in the conjunctival eye sac of 
human. The present paper reports a case study of ocular myasis among sheep farm 
workers caused by Oestrous ovis. The ocular myasis and the associated 
mucopurulent conjunctivitis are occupationally acquired in these cases. This 
study also suggests the treatment of patients and the recovery of the larvae.

DOI: 10.4103/0019-5278.40811
PMCID: PMC2796773
PMID: 20040993

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.


20. Ophthalmologica. 1996;210(2):115-8. doi: 10.1159/000310686.

Retrospective survey of a link between cat and dog antigens and allergic 
conjuctivitis.

Fujishima H(1), Shimazaki J, Yang HY, Toda I, Tsubota K.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Ophthalmology Tokyo Dental College, Chiba, Japan.

This retrospective 3-year study was designed to determine (a) which antigen 
positive patients were found in greater numbers, (b) whether the patients who 
were positive for cat or dog antigen-specific IgE were also positive for other 
antigens, and (c) whether the number of patients with allergic conjunctivitis 
increased during a particular time of the year. A total of 762 patients were 
diagnosed with allergic conjunctivitis including 107 cat-positive and/or 
dog-positive patients. Cat-positive patients were more prevalent than 
dog-positive patients, (p < 0.001). All but 2 patients were positive for other 
antigens, indicating a strong link between the animal antigens and other 
antigens. Cat and dog allergy increased in spring and early summer.

DOI: 10.1159/000310686
PMID: 8859487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Postgrad Med. 1997 May;101(5):185-6, 189-92, 195-6. doi: 
10.3810/pgm.1997.05.246.

Acute red eye. Differentiating viral conjunctivitis from other, less common 
causes.

Weber CM(1), Eichenbaum JW.

Author information:
(1)New York Medical College, Valhalla, USA.

Comment in
    Postgrad Med. 1997 Sep;102(3):63-4.

Adenoviral conjuctivitis is one of the most common causes of acute red eye. 
Other diagnostic considerations include herpes virus conjunctivitis, chlamydial 
conjunctivitis, allergic conjunctivitis, and various other less common 
infections. Careful history taking can help in identifying a viral cause. The 
presentation may range from a minor conjunctivitis resulting from an upper 
respiratory tract infection to a serious, debilitating epidemic 
keratoconjunctivitis. Local care and interventions to minimize transmission are 
the cornerstones of management. Infection is usually self-limiting. Warm soaks 
and artificial tear lubricants may relieve itching and burning. Patients should 
be instructed to avoid touching their eyes, wash hands often, use disposable 
towels, and avoid group activities for as long as an ocular discharge is 
present. Use of topical corticosteroids or antibacterial preparations can lead 
to complications, and injudicious use of topical corticosteroids may mask 
serious conditions that require other interventions.

DOI: 10.3810/pgm.1997.05.246
PMID: 9158614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Tijdschr Diergeneeskd. 1976 Oct 15;101(20):1141-4.

Use of the lysozyme test in the diagnosis of kerato-conjuctivitis sicca in dogs 
and cats.

Stades FC, Beijer EG, Hartman EG.

Comparative studies of the lysozyme test (LT) and the Schirmer tear test (STT) 
revealed that the LT was not reliable in the diagnosis of kerato-conjunctivitis 
sicca (KCS) in dogs and cats. This is in contrast to its successful use in human 
patients. No M. lysodeikticus lysating substrates were detectable in the tear 
fluid of the normal cat.

PMID: 1013972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Eur Ann Allergy Clin Immunol. 2003 Mar;35(3):99-102.

[Particular aspects of rhinitis and rhino-conjunctivitis].

[Article in French]

Favennec F(1), Sonneville A, De Luca H, Castros A.

Author information:
(1)Unité d'Assistance Respiratoire, CHU de Tours, 37044 Tours.

The authors report their experience of 28 years of practice in the opthalmology 
service of the CHRU at Rennes. The describe certain particular aspects of 
rhinitis and rhino-conjuctivitis where the danger resides in an extensive risk 
to the uvula or the bronchi. They insist on the importance of understanding 
polyvalents in internal medicine (rôle of the seat of gingivodentary "ideas", 
value of research into indicative markers of protection A2 and B40 in the HLA 
system. In the region of nutrition, they emphasize the importance of the rôle of 
zinc, of vitamin C and of magnesium. They base their hopes on study of the local 
markers of sensitivity, in order to assess the elements of preventative action 
for an eventual ocular and bronchial extension.

PMID: 12718246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Br J Ophthalmol. 1978 Dec;62(12):836-7. doi: 10.1136/bjo.62.12.836.

Adenovirus type 21 keratoconjunctivitis.

Darougar S, Pearce R, Gibson JA, McSwiggan DA.

A case of keratoconjunctivitis caused by adenovirus type 21 in London has been 
described. A 59-year-old woman attented hospital in August 1974 complaining of a 
3-week history of redness, grittiness, watery discharge, and photophobia in her 
left eye and a slight upper respiratory infection. Clinical examination showed a 
moderate follicular conjuctivitis mainly in the lower and upper fornices, which 
lasted for 6 weeks. In the cornea a moderate amount of epithelial and 
subepithelial punctate keratitis was observed. The subepithelial opacities were 
coarse, discrete, and round and lasted for 4 months. The course of follicular 
conjunctivitis and the subepithelial punctate keratitis in this patient was 
similar to epidemic keratoconjunctivitis caused by adenovirus 8. A conjunctival 
swabbing collected from this patient was positive for adenovirus serotype 21.

DOI: 10.1136/bjo.62.12.836
PMCID: PMC1043368
PMID: 216386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Trop Doct. 2011 Jul;41(3):139-40. doi: 10.1258/td.2011.110058. Epub 2011 Jun 15.

Blindness following visceral leishmaniasis: a neglected post-kala-azar 
complication.

Khalil EA(1), Musa AM, Younis BM, Elfaki ME, Zijlstra EE, Elhassan AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology & Immunology, Institute of Endemic Diseases, 
University of Khartoum, Khartoum, PO Box 45235, Sudan. eltahirk@iend.org

Visceral leishmaniasis (VL) is an important cause of morbidity and mortality 
that affects multiple organs. Post-kala-azar ocular involvement is a serious 
complication that can manifest as blepharo-conjuctivitis or pan-uveitis. Failure 
of prompt diagnosis and treatment can result in blindness. We report five cases 
with pan-uveitis that followed the successful treatment of VL and consequent 
post-kala-azar dermal leishmaniasis were presented. Two patients lost their 
sight permanently but the rest were successfully treated. A high index of 
suspicion and prompt treatment are of paramount importance in order to avoid 
blindness following post-kala-azar ocular uveitis.

DOI: 10.1258/td.2011.110058
PMID: 21676981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Health Technol (Berl). 2022;12(2):569-582. doi: 10.1007/s12553-021-00624-9. Epub 
2022 Jan 27.

An alternative approach to determination of Covid-19 personal risk index by 
using fuzzy logic.

Şimşek H(1), Yangın E(1).

Author information:
(1)Antalya Bilim Üniversitesi, Antalya, Turkey.

COVID-19 disease is an outbreak that seriously affected the whole world, 
occurred in December 2019, and thus was declared a global epidemic by WHO (World 
Health Organization). To reduce the impact of the epidemic on humans, it is 
important to detect the symptoms of the disease in a timely and accurate manner. 
Recently, several new variants of COVID-19 have been identified in the United 
Kingdom (UK), South Africa, Brazil and India, and preliminary findings have been 
suggested that these mutations increase the transmissibility of the virus. 
Therefore, the aim of this study is to construct a support system based on fuzzy 
logic for experts to help detect of COVID-19 infection risk in a timely and 
accurate manner and to get a numerical output on symptoms of the virus from 
every person. The decision support system consists of three different sub and 
one main Mamdani type fuzzy inference systems (FIS). Subsystems are Common- 
Serious symptoms (First), Rare Symptoms (Second) and Personal Information 
(Third). The first FIS has five inputs, fever-time, cough-time, fatigue-time, 
shortness of breath and chest pain/dysfunction; the second FIS has four inputs, 
Loss of Taste/Smell, Body Aches, Conjuctivitis, and Nausea/Vomiting/Diarrhea; 
and the third FIS has three inputs, Age, Smoke, and Comorbidities. Then, we 
obtain personal risk index of individual by combining the outputs of these 
subsystems in a final FIS. The results can be used by health professionals and 
epidemiologists to make inferences about public health. Numerical output can 
also be useful for self-control of an individual.

© IUPESM and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s12553-021-00624-9
PMCID: PMC8791684
PMID: 35103231

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.


27. Syst Appl Microbiol. 1999 Feb;22(1):22-7. doi: 10.1016/S0723-2020(99)80024-1.

Characterization of the koala biovar of Chlamydia pneumoniae at four gene 
loci--ompAVD4, ompB, 16S rRNA, groESL spacer region.

Wardrop S(1), Fowler A, O'Callaghan P, Giffard P, Timms P.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Molecular Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences, Queensland 
University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia.

Koalas are infected with two species of Chlamydia, C. pecorum and C. pneumoniae. 
While it is known that significant genetic diversity occurs in the C. pecorum 
strains infecting koalas, very little is known about the C. pneumoniae strains 
that infect this host. In the current study, 10 isolates of koala C. pneumoniae 
were analysed at four gene loci and found to be different to both the human and 
horse C. pneumoniae strains at all loci (biovar differences ranging from 0.3% at 
groESL up to 9.0% at ompAVD4). All koala biovar isolates studied were found to 
be 100% identical at ompAVD4 (all 10 isolates) and at ompB (all three isolates) 
gene. This lack of allelic polymorphisms at ompAVD4 has now been observed for 
koala C. pneumoniae, human C. pneumoniae, guinea pig inclusion conjuctivitis C. 
psittaci and feline conjuctivitis C. psittaci and may be correlated to a lack of 
antibody response to the chlamydial major outer membrane protein (MOMP) in these 
same strain/host combinations. This study also provides the first documented 
case of natural C. pneumoniae infection causing a severe and extended 
respiratory episode in a captive koala population. This captive episode is in 
contrast to most free-range observations in which koala C. pneumoniae is rarely 
documented as causing respiratory, ocular or urogenital tract disease.

DOI: 10.1016/S0723-2020(99)80024-1
PMID: 10188275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Infect Immun. 1984 Oct;46(1):105-10. doi: 10.1128/iai.46.1.105-110.1984.

Genetically manipulated virulence of Yersinia enterocolitica.

Heesemann J, Algermissen B, Laufs R.

Mobilizable virulence plasmids of Yersinia enterocolitica of serotypes O:3 and 
O:9 were constructed by cointegration of a mobilizable vector into the virulence 
plasmids. The obtained cointegrates were mobilized into plasmidless Y. 
enterocolitica strains of serotypes O:3, O:5, O:8, and O:9. The transfer 
experiments revealed the existence of two different subgroups of 
plasmid-associated traits. (i) Animal virulence functions (mouse lethality and 
conjuctivitis provocation) were only transferable to plasmid-cured derivatives 
of virulent parent strains (serotypes O:3, O:8, and O:9), but they were not 
transferable to Y. enterocolitica antigen reference strains (serotypes O:3 and 
O:8) or to a plasmidless clinical isolate of serotype O:5. A further striking 
result was that a serotype O:8 strain regained the mouse lethality trait after 
receipt of a plasmid from a strain not lethal to mice. These results demonstrate 
that plasmid-mediated animal virulence functions are not uniformly expressed 
within Y. enterocolitica. (ii) The second subgroup of plasmid-mediated traits 
(calcium dependency, surface agglutinogens, HEp-2 cell adherence, and protein 
release) were transferable to all Y. enterocolitica recipient strains tested 
(serotypes O:3, O:5, O:8, and O:9 of different origin). For the first time HEp-2 
cell adherence and temperature-induced release of five major protein species are 
described as transferable traits.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.46.1.105-110.1984
PMCID: PMC261428
PMID: 6480101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Practitioner. 1971 Feb;206(232):253-5.

An epidemic called Apollo. An outbreak of conjuctivitis in Nigeria.

Parrott WF.

PMID: 5554561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Invest Urol. 1975 Nov;13(3):227-32.

Asymptomatic bacteriuria, bacteremia, and other infections due to NSU 
corynebacteria.

Furness G, Kaminski Z.

By means of the new medium, nonspecific urethritis (NSU) chocolate agar, NSU 
corymebacteria were isolated from patients with asymptomatic bacteriuria, 
bacteremia, cervicitis, conjuctivitis, and pericarditis, and also with bone 
marrow, wound, and cul-de-sac infections. The NSU corynebacteria were considered 
the etiologic agents. On the basis of biochemical reactions, antibiotic 
sensitivity, and complement fixation tests some isolates were the same 
microorganisms. Both patients with conjunctivitis were infected with the same 
NSU corynebacteria. A second isolate was cultured from patients with 
osteomyelitis and cervicitis, while a third was recovered from an infected leg 
wound and from a patient with pericarditis. Seven of the isolates, when injected 
into rabbits hypersensitive to four NSU corynebacteria isolated from the 
inflamed epididymis of patients with epididymitis, elicited delayed 
hypersensitivity reactions, which indicated that they also were related 
antigenically. It is suggested that nonspecific urethritis and eididymitis may 
represent an infection with NSU corynebacteria, or may be an extension of 
bacteriuria due to these microorganisms, with a delayed hypersensitivity 
reaction as a possible additional complication. Colony counts on NSU chocolate 
agar of the bacteria in urines from male and female patients were higher than 
those obtained on conventional agar media. NSU chocolate agar is superior to 
other agar media for the isolation of pathogenic and saprophytic bacteria not 
only from the urogenital tract but also from other foci of infection. It is 
easily prepared from commercial blood agar plates and its use should be 
considered when a selective medium is not required.

PMID: 1193819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Infect. 1998 Jan;36(1):101-3. doi: 10.1016/s0163-4453(98)93414-4.

Detection of adenovirus outbreak at a municipal swimming pool by nested PCR 
amplification.

Papapetropoulou M(1), Vantarakis AC.

Author information:
(1)University of Patras Medical School, Public Health Laboratory, Environmental 
Microbiology Patras, Greece.

In July 1995 an outbreak of pharyngoconjuctivitis caused by adenoviruses 
occurred among athletes participating in a swimming contest in a town in 
southern Greece (Peloponnese). At least 80 persons displayed symptoms of the 
illness, with the predominant ones being high fever, sore throat, conjuctivitis, 
headache, and abdominal pain. Poor chlorination was probably the cause of the 
outbreak (residual chlorine <0.2 mg/l), as after hyperchlorination the spread of 
adenoviruses stopped. Rapid detection of adenoviruses in the municipal swimming 
pool water by nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification allowed quick 
control of the outbreak.

DOI: 10.1016/s0163-4453(98)93414-4
PMID: 9515677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Head Face Med. 2007 Mar 14;3:16. doi: 10.1186/1746-160X-3-16.

Chlamydial conjunctivitis presenting as pre septal cellulitis.

Drummond SR(1), Diaper CJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Southern General Hospital, Glasgow, Scotland, 
UK. drummond@jordanhillglasgow.wanadoo.co.uk

Chlamydia conjuctivitis results from infection by chlamydia trachomatis, the 
commonest treatable sexually transmitted infection in Europe. Its clinical 
manifestations involve the conjunctiva and the cornea. The inflammation under 
the upper eyelid may be sufficient to present as ptosis, however previously it 
has not been documented to cause a preseptal cellulitis. We present such a case. 
A 15-year-old girl was diagnosed with a left viral conjunctivitis. Five days 
later, she returned with marked oedema of the left upper and lower lids 
accompanied by erythema. The tarsal conjunctiva revealed follicles and large 
papillae and extra ocular movements revealed discomfort on elevation. A 
secondary diagnosis of bacterial pre septal cellulitis was made and the 
treatment was changed a broad spectrum oral antibiotic. On review at two days, 
the patient now complained of a large amount of purulent discharge in 
association with the marked pre septal swelling. As previous bacteriology and 
virology had been negative, the patient was re swabbed for chlamydia. This 
proved positive and her symptoms completely resolved following administration of 
Azithromycin. In this particular case recognition of the pathogen is important 
to alert the patient to the likelihood of unknown genital infestation. In all 
cases of positive culture, the patient should be counselled to attend a 
genitourinary clinic and to alert any sexual partners to the need to do 
likewise.

DOI: 10.1186/1746-160X-3-16
PMCID: PMC1838900
PMID: 17359543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Exp Eye Res. 2013 Aug;113:74-9. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2013.05.015. Epub 2013 May 
28.

Involvement of chymase in allergic conjunctivitis of guinea pigs.

Nabe T(1), Kijitani Y, Kitagawa Y, Sakano E, Ueno T, Fujii M, Nakao S, Sakai M, 
Takai S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Kyoto Pharmaceutical University, 5 Nakauchi, 
Misasagi, Yamashina, Kyoto 607-8414, Japan. nabe@mb.kyoto-phu.ac.jp

It has been reported that chymase activity was increased in allergic 
conjunctivitis patients and this activity was correlated with the severity of 
the disease. However, the precise roles of chymase in allergic conjunctivitis 
are unclear, and whether chymase inhibitors are effective for allergic 
conjunctivitis has not been reported even in experimental animal models. In this 
study, the roles of chymase in the pathogenesis were evaluated using a selective 
chymase inhibitor, ONO-WH-236, in a guinea pig model of allergic conjunctivitis 
induced by cedar pollen. Sensitized guinea pigs were challenged by the pollen, 
followed by assessing redness and edema in the conjuntiva, and counting the 
frequency of eye scratching as an itch-associated response. Treatment with the 
ONO-WH-236 (40 and 80 mg/kg, p.o.) dose-dependently inhibited the induction of 
redness, edema and scratching behavior. An anti-histaminic drug, ketotifen (3 
mg/kg, p.o.), also significantly inhibited conjunctivitis symptoms. Chymase 
activity was increased in ophthalmic lavage fluid immediately after the pollen 
challenge. The increase in chymase activity was inhibited by in vivo treatment 
with ONO-WH-236. Interestingly, increased histamine in the ophthalmic lavage 
fluid immediately after the challenge was also inhibited by the chymase 
inhibitor. Administration of human recombinant chymase by eye dropping (0.09 and 
0.9 μg/eye) dose-dependently induced scratching behavior, which was inhibited by 
not only ONO-WH-236 but also ketotifen; however, chymase administration induced 
only weak redness in the conjunctiva, which was resistant to treatment with 
anti-histaminic drugs. In conclusion, it was suggested that chymase was released 
from mast cells after antigen challenge, followed by the induction of 
conjunctivitis symptoms through histamine release from mast cells. Thus, chymase 
could be a potential target for pharmacotherapy for allergic conjunctivitis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exer.2013.05.015
PMID: 23726880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Wellcome Open Res. 2025 Mar 31;10:28. doi: 10.12688/wellcomeopenres.23522.2. 
eCollection 2025.

Identification of coxsackievirus A24 variant during an acute hemorrhagic 
conjunctivitis outbreak in coastal Kenya, 2024.

Lambisia AW(1), Mwita Morobe J(1), Moraa E(1), Mwarumba S(1), K N Korir F(2), 
Seif Athman R(3), Kiptui R(4), Mbee M(4), Mugo N(5), Amoth P(4), Muange P(4), J 
Houldcroft C(6), Barasa E(1), Mwangangi J(1)(5), Githinji G(1)(7), C Holmes 
E(8), Isabella Ochola-Oyier L(1), N Agoti C(1)(5)(9).

Author information:
(1)Kenya Medical Research Institute, KEMRI-Wellcome Trust Research Programme, 
Kilifi, Kenya.
(2)Lighthouse for Christ Eye Centre, Mombasa, Kenya.
(3)Coast General Teaching and Referral Hospital, Mombasa, Kenya.
(4)Ministry of Health, Nairobi, Kenya.
(5)Kenya Medical Research Institute, Nairobi, Kenya.
(6)Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, England, UK.
(7)Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Pwani University, Kilifi, 
Kenya.
(8)The University of Sydney School of Medical Sciences, Sydney, Australia.
(9)School of public health, Pwani University, Kilifi, Kenya.

BACKGROUND: In early 2024, a surge in acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis (AHC), 
also referred as "red eye" disease, was observed in coastal Kenya, prompting the 
Ministry of Health to issue an outbreak alert. Herein, we investigated the 
etiology of this outbreak.
METHODS: Ocular swabs were obtained from 13 individuals presenting with AHC at a 
Mombasa clinic in early February 2024. Ten of these were analyzed using 
bacterial cultures, and all 13 using a pan-adenovirus quantitative PCR (qPCR) 
and metagenomic sequencing. Potential viral etiology was confirmed by a specific 
qPCR, amplicon sequencing and phylogenetic analysis.
RESULTS: Bacterial cultures yielded no growth except in three samples where 
non-pathogenic bacteria were detected. All 13 samples were adenovirus qPCR 
negative. Metagenomic sequencing detected coxsackievirus A24 variant (CA24v) in 
three of the 13 samples. CV-A24v detections were confirmed by both CV-A24v 
specific qPCR and amplicon sequencing of an approximately 450 nucleotide long 
VP4/2 junction genomic region. Phylogenetic analysis of the VP4/2 sequences 
showed that they were closely related to CV-A24v genotype IV.
CONCLUSION: The AHC epidemic in coastal Kenya in early 2024 was likely caused by 
CA24v. Metagenomic sequencing is a powerful tool for identifying potential 
causative agents of new disease outbreaks.

Plain Language Summary: In early 2024, there was a significant increase in cases 
of acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis (AHC), commonly known as "red eye" or “pink 
eye’ disease, in coastal Kenya, which led to the Ministry of Health issuing an 
outbreak alert. To understand the cause of this outbreak, we collected eye swabs 
from 13 patients at an eye clinic in Mombasa City, coastal Kenya. Initial 
testing of these samples was performed by checking for growth of pathogenic 
bacteria, and presence of a commonly known viral agent of AHC, adenovirus, using 
a polymerase chain reaction. The results showed no presence of harmful bacteria 
in the samples, and all tested negative for adenovirus. However, on further 
analysis of these samples by characterizing all non-human genetic material in 
the samples using an approach known as metagenomic sequencing, we detected the 
presence coxsackievirus A24 variant (CA24v) genetic material, a well-recognized 
cause of AHC, in three patients. The presence of this virus in the samples was 
confirmed through its specific in-house molecular test and a second genetic 
analysis approach. The CA24v strains detected in the samples were determined to 
be closely related to a known CA24v genotype assigned IV. Our findings suggest 
that the AHC disease outbreak observed in coastal Kenya in early 2024 was likely 
caused by CA24v. We highlight the usefulness of metagenomic sequencing as a tool 
for identifying the causes of new disease outbreaks, crucial for public health 
responses.

Copyright: © 2025 Lambisia AW et al.

DOI: 10.12688/wellcomeopenres.23522.2
PMCID: PMC11992516
PMID: 40225905

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.


35. J Ophthalmol. 2015;2015:965627. doi: 10.1155/2015/965627. Epub 2015 Apr 27.

Predictors of HIV/AIDS Related Ocular Manifestations among HIV/AIDS Patients in 
Felege Hiwot Referral Hospital, Northwest Ethiopia.

Sharew G(1), Azage M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, Bahir 
Dar University, P.O. Box 79, Bahir Dar, Ethiopia.
(2)Department of Public Health, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, Bahir 
Dar University, P.O. Box 79, Bahir Dar, Ethiopia.

Background. Ocular manifestations in people living with HIV/AIDS are varied and 
affect almost all the structures of eye leading to visual impairment or 
blindness. Therefore, the aim of this study was to identify the predictors of 
HIV related ocular manifestation among ART clinic clients. Methods. Institution 
based cross-sectional study was employed among ART clients at Felege Hiwot 
referral hospital, northwest Ethiopia. The study was conducted from 1 January 
2013 to 30 January 2013. A total of 369 systematically and randomly selected 
clients were included in the study. Data were collected using structured 
questionnaires and ophthalmologic clinical examination. Data were entered and 
analyzed using SPSS version 16.0. Binary and multivariable logistic regression 
analyses were computed to identify independent predictors of HIV related ocular 
manifestation. Results. Twenty-five percent (25.7%) of HIV patients had ocular 
manifestations. The three most frequent signs were Squamoid Conjuctival growth 
(26.9%), ophthalmic herpes zoster (22.1%), and Bacterial Conjuctivitis (17.2%). 
History of eye problem, CD4 count, and visual acuity of the eye were the 
predictors of HIV related ocular manifestation. Conclusion. In this study, a 
higher proportion of ocular manifestations were detected in HIV/AIDS patients. 
Visual acuity and CD4 counts were the independent predictors of ocular 
manifestations. This finding gives an insight for policy makers and concerned 
body to integrate ophthalmic examination in ART clinics to improve the health 
condition of HIV/ADIS patients.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/965627
PMCID: PMC4427099
PMID: 26000175


36. Trop Anim Health Prod. 2010 Aug;42(6):1041-2. doi: 10.1007/s11250-010-9526-1. 
Epub 2010 Feb 10.

Serological evidence of bovine herpesvirus-1 (BoHV-1) infection in yaks 
(Peophagus grunniens) from the National Research Centre on Yak, India.

Nandi S(1), Kumar M.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Animal Disease Research and Diagnosis, Indian Veterinary Research 
Institute, Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh, India. snandi1901@yahoo.com

Erratum in
    Trop Anim Health Prod. 2010 Aug;42(6):1315.

Bovine herpesvirus-1 (BoHV-1) causes a variety of disease syndromes including, 
respiratory, nervous and reproductive disorders both in domestic as well as wild 
bovines and the disease is prevalent throughout the world including India. In 
this study, serum samples of yaks were screened for serological evidence of 
BoHV-1 in a yak farm with history of abortion and kerato-conjuctivitis by 
competition-ELISA. The result of seroprevalence of BoHV-1 infections in yaks 
(Poephagus grunniens) revealed that the overall seroprevalence was 60.1%. The 
sero-prevalence of BoHV-1 infections was highest in male calf (67.7%) followed 
by yak cows (62.6%), yak bulls (56.8%), and yak heifers (50.0%).

DOI: 10.1007/s11250-010-9526-1
PMID: 20143159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Br J Ophthalmol. 1982 Nov;66(11):732-5. doi: 10.1136/bjo.66.11.732.

Immunoassay of tear lysozyme in conjunctival diseases.

Sen DK, Sarin GS.

The tear lysozyme content in 111 normal subjects and in 159 patients with 
various conjunctival diseases was determined by a single radial immunodiffusion 
technique. Tear lysozyme level in normal people was 1.33/mg/ml. (SI conversion: 
mg/ml = g/l.) The mean tear lysozyme levels in patients with chronic irritative 
conjunctivitis (0.97 mg/ml) and nutritional deficiency with epithelial xerosis 
(0.76 mg/ml) were significantly lower than in the normal controls. The mean tear 
lysozyme levels in tears from patients with vernal conjuctivitis (1.20 mg/ml), 
phlyctenular conjunctivitis (1.10 mg/ml), and acute bacterial conjunctivitis 
(1.48 mg/ml) were not significantly different from those in the normal controls. 
Superimposition of acute bacterial conjunctivitis on trachoma did not alter the 
low tear lysozyme level that existed before in these patients.

DOI: 10.1136/bjo.66.11.732
PMCID: PMC1039911
PMID: 6812619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1992 Dec;11(12):1026-30.

Prophylaxis of ophthalmia neonatorum: comparison of silver nitrate, 
tetracycline, erythromycin and no prophylaxis.

Chen JY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Chung Shan Medical and Dental College Hospital, 
Taichung, Taiwan, Republic of China.

From November, 1989, to October, 1991, 4544 neonates were born at our hospital. 
Neonatal ocular prophylaxis immediately after birth was used with 1% 
tetracycline ophthalmic ointment in 1156 neonates, 0.5% erythromycin ophthalmic 
ointment in 1163 neonates and 1% silver nitrate drops in 1082 neonates. No 
prophylaxis for neonatal conjunctivitis was given to 1143 neonates. A total of 
302 infants (6.7%) developed conjunctivitis during the first 4 weeks of life. 
Between December, 1991, and January, 1992, 425 neonates were born at our 
hospital and all were given 0.5% erythromycin ophthalmic ointment twice in the 
first 24 hours after birth for ocular prophylaxis. Thirty-one (7.3%) infants 
developed conjunctivitis during the neonatal period. The incidence rates of 
neonatal chlamydial conjuctivitis in the tetracycline, erythromycin, silver 
nitrate, no prophylaxis and erythromycin twice groups were 1.3, 1.5, 1.7, 1.6 
and 1.4%, respectively. We conclude that neonatal ocular prophylaxis with 
erythromycin (one or two doses) or tetracycline or silver nitrate does not 
significantly reduce the incidence of neonatal chlamydial conjunctivitis 
compared with that in those given no prophylaxis.

PMID: 1461692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Wien Klin Wochenschr. 2018 Apr;130(7-8):264-272. doi: 10.1007/s00508-018-1324-1. 
Epub 2018 Feb 23.

Challenges in early diagnosis of Kawasaki disease in the pediatric emergency 
department: differentiation from adenoviral and invasive pneumococcal disease.

Stemberger Maric L(1)(2), Papic N(3), Sestan M(4), Knezovic I(4), Tesovic 
G(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Department for Pediatric Infectious Diseases, University Hospital 
for Infectious Diseases, Mirogojska 8, 10000, Zagreb, Croatia. 
lorna_stemberger@yahoo.com.
(2)School of Dental Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. 
lorna_stemberger@yahoo.com.
(3)Department for Viral Hepatitis, University Hospital for Infectious Diseases, 
Zagreb, Croatia.
(4)Clinical Department for Pediatric Infectious Diseases, University Hospital 
for Infectious Diseases, Mirogojska 8, 10000, Zagreb, Croatia.
(5)School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.

Early recognition and distinction of Kawasaki disease (KD) from other febrile 
infectious diseases is one of the biggest challenges in pediatric emergency 
departments (PED). The aim of this study was to assess the utility of clinical 
findings and routinely used laboratory parameters for early discrimination 
between KD, invasive pneumococcal disease (IPD) and adenovirosis (AdV). 
A retrospective, cross-sectional study of children aged 3-36 months 
consecutively admitted to the PED and diagnosed with either KD (n = 110), AdV 
(n = 440) or IPD (n = 122) was conducted. At first presentation to the PED, 
56.3% of KD patients had none or only one clinical criterion, 31% of patients 
with AdV and 11% with IPD had > 2 criteria. The levels of platelets (Plt), 
aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) were higher 
and white blood cells (WBC) significantly lower in KD than in IPD and AdV group. 
The WBC < 20 ×109/l showed a sensitivity of 80.9% and specificity of 79.7% in 
comparison to AdV. The ROC curve showed a significant, but low sensitivity for 
AST, ALT and Plt. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive 
protein (CRP) did not show any significant diagnostic accuracy. Significant 
association between incomplete KD and rash, WBC < 20 ×109 and Plt > 400 ×109/L 
compared to AdV and conjuctivitis, rash and Plt > 400 × 109/L, was found. Due to 
the time delay and nonspecific early presentation, differentiating KD from IPD 
and AdV is challenging. Tools used for identification of patients at risk for 
severe bacterial infections in PED lack sensitivity for identification of KD 
cases. New biomarkers are warranted for distinction of KD from IPD or AdV.

DOI: 10.1007/s00508-018-1324-1
PMID: 29476365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Family Med Prim Care. 2016 Apr-Jun;5(2):291-297. doi: 
10.4103/2249-4863.192341.

International Classification of Primary Care-2 coding of primary care data at 
the general out-patients' clinic of General Hospital, Lagos, Nigeria.

Olagundoye OA(1), van Boven K(2), van Weel C(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Medicine, General Hospital Lagos, Lagos Island, Nigeria.
(2)Department of Primary and Community Care, Radboud University Medical Centre, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Primary and Community Care, Radboud University Medical Centre, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Australian Primary Health Care Research Institute, 
Australian National University, Canberra, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Primary care serves as an integral part of the health systems of 
nations especially the African continent. It is the portal of entry for nearly 
all patients into the health care system. Paucity of accurate data for health 
statistics remains a challenge in the most parts of Africa because of inadequate 
technical manpower and infrastructure. Inadequate quality of data systems 
contributes to inaccurate data. A simple-to-use classification system such as 
the International Classification of Primary Care (ICPC) may be a solution to 
this problem at the primary care level.
OBJECTIVES: To apply ICPC-2 for secondary coding of reasons for encounter (RfE), 
problems managed and processes of care in a Nigerian primary care setting. 
Furthermore, to analyze the value of selected presented symptoms as predictors 
of the most common diagnoses encountered in the study setting.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Content analysis of randomly selected patients' paper 
records for data collection at the end of clinic sessions conducted by family 
physicians at the general out-patients' clinics. Contents of clinical 
consultations were secondarily coded with the ICPC-2 and recorded into excel 
spreadsheets with fields for sociodemographic data such as age, sex, occupation, 
religion, and ICPC elements of an encounter: RfE/complaints, diagnoses/problems, 
and interventions/processes of care.
RESULTS: Four hundred and one encounters considered in this study yielded 915 
RfEs, 546 diagnoses, and 1221 processes. This implies an average of 2.3 RfE, 1.4 
diagnoses, and 3.0 processes per encounter. The top 10 RfE, diagnoses/common 
illnesses, and processes were determined. Through the determination of the 
probability of the occurrence of certain diseases beginning with a 
RfE/complaint, the top five diagnoses that resulted from each of the top five 
RfE were also obtained. The top five RfE were: headache, fever, pain 
general/multiple sites, visual disturbance other and abdominal pain/cramps 
general. The top five diagnoses were: Malaria, hypertension uncomplicated, 
visual disturbance other, peptic ulcer, and upper respiratory infection. From 
the determination of the posterior probability given the top five RfE, malaria, 
hypertension, upper respiratory infection, refractive error, and conjuctivitis 
were the five most frequent diagnoses that resulted from a complaint of a 
headache.
CONCLUSION: The study demonstrated that ICPC-2 can be applied to primary care 
data in the Nigerian context to generate information about morbidity and 
services provided. It also provided an empirical basis to support diagnosis and 
prognostication in a primary care setting. In developing countries where the 
transition to electronic health records is still evolving and fraught with 
limitations, more reliable data collection can be achieved from paper records 
through the application of the ICPC-2.

DOI: 10.4103/2249-4863.192341
PMCID: PMC5084550
PMID: 27843830


41. Lik Sprava. 2002;(7):3-6.

[Characteristics of modern diagnosis of diseases caused by Chlamydia bacteria].

[Article in Ukrainian]

Marushko IuV, Desiatnyk DH, Bychkova NH, Marushko TV, Iehipko HV.

Chlamidia psitacci, Chlamidia trachomatis, Chlamidia pneumoniae are 
intracellular bacterial parasites causing ornithosis, trachoma, conjuctivitis, 
urogenital, respiratory infections, arthritis, Reiter's disease. The role is 
discussed of the above microorganisms in the development of cardiological, 
neurological disorders. The past years have seen further progress in 
microbiological diagnosis but information now available on, in the first place, 
Chlamidia pneum., is scarce. In most clinical studies they use a serological 
diagnosis which is not without faults, with the cultural method and 
polymerization chain reaction being most informative diagnostic tools. The 
diagnostic value of the above-mentioned reaction will, we believe, increase with 
its improvement. In the preliminary diagnosis, cytomorphological methods can be 
made use of.

PMID: 12587294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Can J Comp Med. 1976 Jan;40(1):60-6.

Experimental production of infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis: comparison of 
serological and immunological responses using pili fractions of Moraxella bovis.

Pugh GW Jr, Hughes DE.

The effect of vaccinating cattle and mice on the development of 
keratoconjunctivitis was studied. Cattle were vaccinated with whole cells, 
disrupted cells and pili fractions of three strains of Moraxella bovis. Mice 
were vaccinated with pili fractions of three strains. The resistance of all 
vaccinated animals was challenged with virulent cultures of M. bovis. In an 
attempt to correlate the response seen after vaccination and challenge with a 
pili fraction of M. bovis, vaccinated cattle and mice were grouped on the basis 
of signs of disease manifested and compared on the basis of serological 
responses. Serum samples were tested for antibodies by a gel diffusion 
precipitin test. A greater number of the sera of resistant cattle had antibodies 
to the homologous pili antigen than those of vaccinated nonresistant cattle. 
Cattle vaccinated with disrupted cells were not resistant to infectious bovine 
kerato-conjuctivitis and their sera lacked antibodies against the pili antigens. 
Vaccinated mice were more resistant to infectious bovine kerato-conjuctivitis 
and their sera lacked antibodies against the pili antigens. Vaccinated mice were 
more resistant to challenge exposure by homologous than heterologous cultures. A 
greater number of the sera of resistant mice had antibodies to pili antigens 
than nonresistant mice.

PMCID: PMC1277519
PMID: 1000379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. West Afr J Med. 1998 Jul-Sep;17(3):168-72.

Bacterial eye infection in neonates, a prospective study in a neonatal unit.

Iroha EO(1), Kesah CN, Egri-Okwaji MT, Odugbemi TO.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, University of Lagos, Nigeria.

One hundred and fifty five neonates with conjunctivitis admitted into the 
neonatal unit at the Lagos University Teaching Hospital were microbiologically 
investigated. This was to determine the bacterial aetiologic agent(s) in 
neonatal eye infection and highlight some risk factors. Antimicrobial 
susceptibility testing was done on the pathogens isolated using the diskagar 
diffusion method. The incidence of conjuctivitis in the newborn was 18 per 1000 
live births. Predisposing factor noted were vaginal delivery, asphyxia 
neonatorum and prolonged rupture of membrane. Pathogens predominantly isolated 
were Staphylococcus aureus (37.4%), Coagilase negative Staphylococci (12.3%), 
Klebsiella pneumoniae (12.9%) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (8.2%). Antimicrobial 
suscepibility results revealed varied degrees of susceptibility to ofloxacin 
(75%), Cloxacillin, erythromycin, Gentamicin and augumentin (30%) by the gram 
positive bacteria while most of the gram negative were susceptible to colistin 
and ofloxacin (above 90%). The high incidence of bacterial eye infection should 
be minimized by the elimination of the risk factors and adoption of stringent 
aseptic measures in the care of the neonate.

PMID: 9814086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Afr Health Sci. 2003 Aug;3(2):83-6.

Ocular manifestations in paediatric HIV/AIDS patients in Mulago Hospital, 
Uganda.

Ikoona E(1), Kalyesubula I, Kawuma M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Makerere University, Kampala, Uganda.

BACKGROUND: In Uganda the prevalence of HIV averages 12% as was reported to the 
STD/AIDS control surveillance unit. In Uganda there are approximately 30,000 HIV 
infected infants per year. The burden of HIV disease is high in Uganda and 
patients present with ocular complications. However, there is paucity of 
information and knowledge concerning ocular manifestations in the paediatric 
HIV/AIDS population and how they may differ from those of adults.
OBJECTIVES: To describe the ocular manifestations of HIV/AIDS infection in an 
African paediatric population. Generally the study will record the external 
ocular manifestations seen but specifically to document the intra-ocular 
lesions, in particular the retinal changes associated with paediatric HIV/AIDS.
DESIGN: A cross-sectional hospital based study.
SETTING: The study was conducted at the Paediatric Infectious Disease Clinic at 
Upper Mulago Hospital, in Kampala, Uganda.
PATIENTS: Patients are those with positive HIV sero status, with or without 
symptoms and signs of AIDS. Parents/caretakers of the children were interviewed 
to obtain the socio-demographic data of the patients and a general physical as 
well as an ophthalmic examination were conducted to document any ocular 
problems.
RESULTS: A total of 158 HIV -infected children were examined. The overall rate 
of ophthalmic involvement was 35%. The most common finding was a non-purulent 
conjuctivitis, observed in 12% of the patients, followed by perivasculitis of 
the peripheral retinal vessels, in 12% of patients and molluscum contagiosum.

PMCID: PMC2141598
PMID: 12913799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Eur J Epidemiol. 1989 Dec;5(4):428-31. doi: 10.1007/BF00140134.

Experimental Q fever in sheep.

Martinov SP(1), Neikov P, Popov GV.

Author information:
(1)Central Research Veterinary Medical Institute, National Reference Laboratory 
of Chlamydial and Rickettsial Infections, Sofia, Bulgaria.

The aim of the present investigation is the complex study of experimental 
infection in pregnant ewes by means of clinical, serological, biological, 
histological and Electron microscopy methods. Four ewes, pregnant from the 2nd 
to 5th month, were infected by intravenous (in one case by intraperitoneal) 
routes with a C. burnetii strain at 10(6) ID 50/ml. The clinical illness in all 
of the animals was characterized by fever and two-phase temperature reaction on 
the 5th and 12th days. The clinical symptoms were as follows: torpidity, reduced 
appetite, thirst, conjuctivitis, rhinitis, rapid breathing. As a result of the 
developed latent infection, after the acute stage, the animals gave birth to 
three unviable lambs who died within 24 h. Another lamb was still-born. The 
lambs showed cachexia, arthritis, ataxia, wrinkled skin. The highest CF-titers 
(1:256-1:512) were reached on the 40th day, but serum antibodies (1:8-1:32) 
first appeared on the 8th day. The titers began to decrease on the 60th day. The 
pathomorphological changes testify to a latent infection characterized by 
placentitis, lymphocellular proliferation of the lamb's parenchymal organs and 
lymph nodes, multiple thromboses, interstitial pneumonia and plural 
proliferative changes. The EM exam showed rickettsiae in placentas mainly in the 
form of inclusions in cytoplasm of leukocytes and epithelial cells.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00140134
PMID: 2606170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Tijdschr Diergeneeskd. 1992 Feb 1;118(3):82-4.

[An outbreak of keratoconjunctivitis in a dairy farm].

[Article in Dutch]

van Weering HJ(1), Koch MJ.

Author information:
(1)Gezondheidsdienst in West- en Midden-Nederland, Gouda.

An outbreak of infectious kerato-conjunctivitis is described in a dairy herd 
during the (winter)stable period. Moraxella was isolated from lacrimation fluid 
from three animals. The development of the infection was possibly precipitated 
by a vaccination with modified live IBR virus, adenovirus type 3 and 
parainfluenza virus type 3. Presumably, climatological-stable conditions play an 
important role in the clinical manifestation of the infection.

PMID: 1287897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Urol. 1998 Nov;160(5):1775-8.

Prevalence of and risk factors for latex sensitization in patients with spina 
bifida.

Bernardini R(1), Novembre E, Lombardi E, Mezzetti P, Cianferoni A, Danti AD, 
Mercurella A, Vierucci A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, A. Meyer Hospital, University of Florence, Vicenza, 
Italy.

PURPOSE: We determined the prevalence of and risk factors for latex 
sensitization in patients with spina bifida.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 59 consecutive subjects 2 to 40 years old with 
spina bifida answered a questionnaire, and underwent a latex skin prick test and 
determination of serum IgE specific for latex by RAST CAP radioimmunoassay. We 
also noted the relationships of total serum IgE skin prick tests to common air 
and food allergens. In addition, skin prick plus prick tests were also done with 
fresh foods, including kiwi, pear, orange, almond, pineapple, apple, tomato and 
banana.
RESULTS: Latex sensitization was present in 15 patients (25%) according to the 
presence of IgE specific to latex, as detected by a skin prick test in 9 and/or 
RAST CAP in 13. Five latex sensitized patients (33.3%) had clinical 
manifestations, such as urticaria, conjuctivitis, angioedema, rhinitis and 
bronchial asthma, while using a latex glove and inflating a latex balloon. Atopy 
was present in 21 patients (35.6%). In 14 patients (23%) 1 or more skin tests 
were positive for fresh foods using a prick plus prick technique. Tomato, kiwi, 
and pear were the most common skin test positive foods. Univariate analysis 
revealed that a history of 5 or more operations, atopy and positive prick plus 
prick tests results for pear and kiwi were significantly associated with latex 
sensitization. Multivariate analysis demonstrated that only atopy and a history 
of 5 or more operations were significantly and independently associated with 
latex sensitization.
CONCLUSIONS: A fourth of the patients with spina bifida were sensitized to 
latex. Atopy and an elevated number of operations were significant and 
independent predictors of latex sensitization in these cases.

PMID: 9783950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Vestn Oftalmol. 2003 Jan-Feb;119(1):38-9.

[Use of cycloferon in a combined treatment of chlamydial conjunctivitis].

[Article in Russian]

Aznabaev MT, Latypova EA, Mal'khanov VB.

A high therapeutic efficiency of cycloferon, an interferon inductor, was 
demonstrated when it is combined with antibiotics in the treatment of chlamidial 
conjuctivitis. The use of the mentioned drug for acute chlamidial conjuctivitis 
prevents relapses.

PMID: 12608044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. East Afr Med J. 1994 Jul;71(7):473-5.

Allergies and skin testing: a Nairobi experience.

De Souza M.

A prospective study of 72 consecutive patients with symptoms of allergy is 
presented. Patients aged 20-39 years formed the bulk of the study population 
(55.6%). Most patients had allergic rhinitis (48.6%); bronchial asthma and 
atopic dermatitis occurred in 29 patients (40.3%) each. Drug allergies were 
found in 22 patients (30.6%), urticaria in 15 (20.8%), food allergies in 13 
(18.1%), contact dermatitis in 10 (13.9%) and allergic conjuctivitis in 6 
patients (8.3%). In many cases more than one allergic condition appeared 
simultaneously. Skin and prick tests and skin patch tests were done on 46 
(63.9%) and 65 (90.3%) patients respectively. Soaps were most frequently 
implicated in positive reactions (75.0%); D. pteronyssinus, drugs, animal dander 
and foods gave positive reactions in 40.3%, 30.6%, 19.4% and 18.1% respectively. 
The need to have a high index of suspicion towards allergic conditions, 
especially extrinsic bronchial asthma, is stressed.

PMID: 7828505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 1996 Aug;234(8):510-4. doi: 
10.1007/BF00184860.

Evaluation of two nonculture antigen tests and three serotests for detection of 
anti-chlamydial antibodies in the diagnosis of ocular chlamydial infections.

Haller EM(1), Auer-Grumbach P, Stuenzner D, Kessler HH, Pierer K, Zenz H, 
Muellner K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Karl-Franzens University, Graz, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Diagnosis of chlamydial conjuctivitis is difficult in chronic 
diseases because chlamydial elementary bodies are mostly undetectable in 
conjunctival scrapings by cell culture. We therefore compared two nonculture 
antigen tests and three different serotests for anti-chlamydial antibodies with 
McCoy cell culture, the "gold standard" of chlamydial diagnosis. Conjunctival 
scrapings and serum samples of 93 patients attending the outpatient eye clinic 
in Graz because of chronic follicular conjunctivitis were tested.
METHODS: A total of 558 conjunctival scrapings and 93 serum samples were 
investigated. Chlamydial antigen detection was done by McCoy cell culture, 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR; Amplicor, Roche), and direct immunofluorescence 
assay (DFA; Microtrak, Syva). Antichlamydial IgA and IgG antibodies in the sera 
were detected by an immunoperoxidase assay (IPAzyme, Savyon) and two different 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (SeroELISA, Savyon and rELISA, medac).
RESULTS: Cell culture and PCR yielded identical results. The positivity rate for 
chlamydial conjunctivitis was 8.6% (8 of 93 patients). PCR proved most sensitive 
and most specific. IPAzyme was 75% sensitive for IgA and 100% for IgG; SeroELISA 
and rELISA were less sensitive. IPAzyme was 81% specific for IgA and 47.3% for 
IgG. SeroELISA and rELISA were less specific for IgA, but more specific for IgG. 
Post-test likelihood of disease was greatest in IPAzyme.
CONCLUSIONS: PCR proved to be a good alternative to cell culture; DFA is useful 
for quick diagnosis. Genus-specific serotests cannot compete with chlamydial 
antigen detection. They differ in sensitivity and specificity because of the 
antigen type they present. They are still of only supportive value in cases 
where chlamydial antigen detection is not possible. Recently introduced 
species-specific antibody tests should be of greater value.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00184860
PMID: 8858357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Environ Int. 2001 Oct;27(4):311-4. doi: 10.1016/s0160-4120(01)00061-7.

A pilot survey of blood lead levels in various types of workers in the United 
Arab Emirates.

Bener A(1), Almehdi AM, Alwash R, Al-Neamy FR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Community Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
United Arab Emirates University, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates. abener@uaeu.ac.ae

The aim of the present study is to determine the effect of blood lead on the 
health of industrial workers in United Arab Emirates (UAE). This is a 
cross-sectional pilot survey of blood lead levels (BLL) of 100 industrial 
workers (exposed) and 100 non-industrial workers (nonexposed), matched for age, 
sex and nationality selected from Al-Ain, Abu-Dhabi Emirate. Industrial workers 
had significantly higher mean of BLL (77.5+/-42.8 microg/dl and median 80.9 
microg/dl) than non-industrial workers (19.8+/-12.3 microg/dl and median 11.0 
microg/dl). In the present study, reported symptoms among industrial workers 
were strongly associated with BLL nausea/vomiting, muscular symptoms, dizziness, 
fatigue, irritability, memory disturbances, insomnia and allergic conjuctivitis, 
rhinitis and dermatitis. Furthermore, the present study revealed that industrial 
workers had higher prevalence of respiratory symptoms for phlegm, shortness of 
breath and diagnosed asthma. In conclusion, this study determined that 
occurrence of certain symptoms might be associated with lead exposure among 
industrial workers.

DOI: 10.1016/s0160-4120(01)00061-7
PMID: 11686641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Pediatr Ophthalmol Strabismus. 1980 Sep-Oct;17(5):337-40. doi: 
10.3928/0191-3913-19800901-17.

The ocular health status of postprimary school children in Kaduna, Nigeria: 
report of a survey.

Abiose A, Bhar IS, Allanson MA.

In a study of 5,220 postprimary school children in Nigeria, 10.36% had one or 
more ophthalmic defects requiring attention. The common problems encountered 
were conjuctivitis, refractive errors, and muscle imbalance, most of which were 
either intermittent or incomitant. Low degree myopia is common even though high 
myopia is not frequently seen. Old uveitis and corneal opacities were found to 
cause gross visual defects in some students and early macular degeneration was 
detected in nin students. The responsibility of the school medical officer in 
treating early infective cases and in referring other more complicated cases to 
hospital is emphasized.

DOI: 10.3928/0191-3913-19800901-17
PMID: 7441448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Onderstepoort J Vet Res. 1997 Jun;64(2):147-52.

Effect of the South African asinine-94 strain of equine arteritis virus (EAV) in 
pregnant donkey mares and duration of maternal immunity in foals.

Paweska JT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology, Onderstepoort Veterinary Institute, South Africa.

Clinical, virological and serological responses were investigated in five 
pregnant donkey mares after experimental exposure to the South African 
asinine-94 strain of equine arteritis virus (EAV), and the duration of maternal 
immunity to EAV was studied in their foals. In four intranasally inoculated 
mares, fever with maximum rectal temperatures of 39.1-40.7 degrees C was 
recorded 2-11 d after challenge. All the inoculated mares developed mild 
depression, and a serous ocular and nasal discharge; in three mares mild 
conjuctivitis was observed. The virus was recovered from the nasopharynx and 
from buffy-coat samples of all the mares 3-10 d, and 2-18 d post inoculation 
(p.i.), respectively. Seroconversion to EAV was detected on days 8-10 p.i. Peak 
serum-virus-neutralizing antibody titres of log10 1.8-2.4, and IgG ELISA OD 
values of 0.85-2.15 were recorded 2-3 weeks p.i. The in-contact (p.c.) control 
mare developed fever on days 15-19 post exposure, and showed mild clinical signs 
of equine viral arteritis similar to those observed in the inoculated mares. 
Seroconversion to EAV was detected in the p.c. mare on day 20 post exposure, and 
virus was isolated from nasal swabs and blood samples collected at the time of 
the febrile response and 1-3 d afterwards. None of the mares aborted. After they 
had given normal birth 45-128 d p.i. or after p.c. exposure, no virus could be 
isolated from their placentas. The concentration of EAV-neutralizing antibody in 
colostrum was two to eight times higher than in serum samples collected at the 
time of parturition. All the foals born to infected mares were clinically normal 
at the time of birth and throughout the subsequent 1-2 months of observation. No 
EAV was recovered from the buffy-coat fraction of blood samples collected at 
birth nor from those collected on days 1, 2 and 7 after birth. Also, no 
virus-serum-neutralizing or IgG ELISA antibody to EAV was detected in sera 
collected immediately after birth before the foals started nursing. The 
colostrum-derived maternal antibodies against EAV gradually declined and could 
not be detected by either the VN test or ELISA for 2-3 months after birth. This 
study demonstrates that the asinine-94 strain of EAV does not cause abortion in 
pregnant donkey mares. Furthermore, no carrier state could be demonstrated in 
foals born to mares infected at the time of pregnancy.

PMID: 9352564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Aust N Z J Med. 1977 Jun;7(3):267-70. doi: 10.1111/j.1445-5994.1977.tb03684.x.

Serotypes of pneumococci in pneumonia, meningitis and other pneumococcal 
infections.

Hansman D.

During a five-year period, 1965 to 1969 inclusive, pneumococci from 294 patients 
with acute pneumococcal infections were serotyped. Pneumococci of 33 serotypes 
were encountered, of which types 3 and 19 were most frequent. The spectrum of 
infections included pneumonia, meningitis, peritonitis, otitis media and 
mastoiditis, wound infection and conjuctivitis. At least 17 infections were 
fatal, all of which, with one exception, occurred either in infants or in adults 
over 50 years of age. In pneumonia, type 3 pneumococcus was predominant, being 
isolated from 21 of 101 patients. In 67 cases of pneumococcal meningitis, most 
of which were in children, the commonest type was 14. If a pneumococcal vaccine 
is produced for use in Australia, inclusion of serotypes 1, 3, 4, 6, 9, 14, 19 
and 23 should be considered. These eight types caused 52% of the cases of 
pneumonia and 67% of the cases of meningitis in this study.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1445-5994.1977.tb03684.x
PMID: 20874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh). 1975 Jun;53(3):418-26. doi: 
10.1111/j.1755-3768.1975.tb01173.x.

The diagnosis of chronic simple conjunctivitis. Vital staining of tarsus with 
tetrazolium - alcian blue mixture.

Norn MS.

Vital staining with a tetrazolium - alcian blue mixture gave a characteristic 
punctate red staining of the superior or the inferior tarsus in 69% of all 
examined patients with chronic simple conjuctivitis (69 patients subjected to 
168 examinations). The superior tarsus was more frequently stained than the 
inferior (61% against 33%). The staining was most often concentrated centrally 
or in the middle anterior part of the superior tarsus. If located on the 
inferior tarsus, it was most often found medially, anteriorly. No corresponding 
staining was seen in normal eyes. The differential diagnosis involving 
keratoconjunctivitis sicca and pemphigoid is mentioned. The staining is due to 
enzymatic reduction of tetrazolium in the cytoplasm of the tarsal epithelial 
cells. The positive vital staining finding is consistent with a diagnosis of 
chronic simple conjunctivitis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1755-3768.1975.tb01173.x
PMID: 52275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Science. 1960 Dec 2;132(3440):1660-1. doi: 10.1126/science.132.3440.1660.

Virus isolated from inclusion conjunctivitis of newborn (inclusion blennorrhea).

HANNA L, ZICHOSCH J, JAWETZ E, VAUGHAN DG Jr, THYGESON P.

An infant developed acute conjunctivitis 7 days after birth. Smears of the 
mucopurulent discharge contained many typical elementary-body inclusions. From 
conjunctival scrapings a virus resembling trachoma was grown in eggs. When 
instilled into monkey eyes, it produced an acute conjuctivitis resembling the 
human disease. Nine other patients with inclusion conjunctivitis of similar 
intensity failed to yield viruses.

DOI: 10.1126/science.132.3440.1660
PMID: 13711273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Srp Arh Celok Lek. 1994;122 Suppl 1:124-6.

[Diagnostic problems of Stevens-Johnson syndrome. A case report].

[Article in Serbian]

Djordjević N, Sarović N, Pasić S, Dujić A.

Stivens-Johnson Syndrome is a rare, severe, bullose form of erythema multiforme 
of unknown etiology. The role of immunological factors in its pathogenesis 
elucidates. A patients (Sh.V.), nine years of age, was admitted for reccurent 
streptococcal infections with skin and mucose membrane lesions. In June 1990 
streptococcal pharyngitis, fever (38.8-39,9 degrees C) were registered. 
Penicillin was given. Next day bullous lesions on lips, left ear, trunk and 
lower extremities and vesiculose lesions with a wide, erythematose base ("iris") 
and then conjuctivitis were registered. Laboratory tests: SR70.; Leu - 11,0; 
anti-herpes Ab IgG 1/64, IgM 1/8. Stevens-Johnson was diagnosed. There was a 
recidivation two years after - oral lesions followed by necrosis and bleeding, 
after half a year a second recidivation with spreading of bullous and vesiculous 
lesions to penis gland with prepuce of the penis. Last recidivation in February 
1993. Anamnesis: Viral meningitis in 1988. mother suffers from herpes labialis. 
Peripheral blood immunophenotiping lymphocite extremly indicated decreasing 
values of B Ly, NK and IL-2R+ cells. Bacteriological tests showed an increase of 
anti-Chlamidia Ab titer (IgG 1/128, IgA and IgM +). In virological testing there 
was no increase of titer of Abs against viral antigens (Herpes simplex virus, 
Varicella-Zoster virus, Citomegalovirus, Adenovirus). We conclude that 
Stevens-Johnson Sy to be diagnosed by characteristic clinical features, 
aspecialy by frequent reccurences. Immunological testing during the last 
recidivation showed that parameters of humoral immune reactivity were within 
normal ranges while revealed defects of cellular immune reactivity cannot 
elucidate the ethiopathogenesis of this disease.

PMID: 18173215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


58. CLAO J. 1998 Jan;24(1):48-51.

Twice-a-day versus four-times-a-day ofloxacin treatment of external ocular 
infection.

Friedlaender MH(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Ophthalmology, Scripps Clinic and Research Foundation, La Jolla, 
CA 92037, USA.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to compare the efficacies of 0.3% 
ofloxacin eyedrops, when given twice-a-day (BID) versus four-times-a-day (QID), 
for the treatment of external ocular disease.
METHOD: Fifty patients with blepharitis, conjuctivitis, or 
blepharoconjunctivitis were randomly assigned to treatment with 0.3% ofloxacin 
eyedrops, BID or QID, for 10 days. Signs, symptoms, and cultures were evaluated 
at the beginning and at the end of the study.
RESULTS: The clinical outcome was virtually identical in the two groups. There 
was a significant decrease in clinical scores in the BID and QID groups by days 
3 to 5 (2.6-3.0 points) and a further decrease by day 11 (4.3-5.0 points). There 
was no significant difference between the two groups at any time interval. 
Microbiologic studies showed a reduction in colony-forming units in 87% of the 
BID group and in 80% of the QID group.
CONCLUSION: The treatment of external ocular disease with 0.3% ofloxacin 
eyedrops was equally effective when given BID or QID.

PMID: 9474454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Cesk Oftalmol. 1988 Jul;44(4):272-5.

[Giant papillary conjunctivitis due to the Spofa Lens contact lenses].

[Article in Czech]

Vymazal M, Vymazalová Z, Dokonalová E.

PMID: 3168029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]