1. Eur J Pharmacol. 2020 Dec 15;889:173644. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2020.173644. Epub 
2020 Oct 11.

Treatment for COVID-19: An overview.

Stasi C(1), Fallani S(2), Voller F(2), Silvestri C(2).

Author information:
(1)Epidemiology Unit, Tuscany Regional Health Agency, Florence, Italy; 
Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Careggi University Hospital, 
Florence, Italy. Electronic address: cristina.stasi@gmail.com.
(2)Epidemiology Unit, Tuscany Regional Health Agency, Florence, Italy.

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is an infectious disease caused by 
coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) that causes a severe acute respiratory syndrome, a 
characteristic hyperinflammatory response, vascular damage, microangiopathy, 
angiogenesis and widespread thrombosis. Four stages of COVID-19 have been 
identified: the first stage is characterised by upper respiratory tract 
infection; the second by the onset of dyspnoea and pneumonia; the third by a 
worsening clinical scenario dominated by a cytokine storm and the consequent 
hyperinflammatory state; and the fourth by death or recovery. Currently, no 
treatment can act specifically against the SARS-CoV-2 infection. Based on the 
pathological features and different clinical phases of COVID-19, particularly in 
patients with moderate to severe COVID-19, the classes of drugs used are 
antiviral agents, inflammation inhibitors/antirheumatic drugs, low molecular 
weight heparins, plasma, and hyperimmune immunoglobulins. During this emergency 
period of the COVID-19 outbreak, clinical researchers are using and testing a 
variety of possible treatments. Based on these premises, this review aims to 
discuss the most updated pharmacological treatments to effectively act against 
the SARS-CoV-2 infection and support researchers and clinicians in relation to 
any current and future developments in curing COVID-19 patients.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2020.173644
PMCID: PMC7548059
PMID: 33053381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.


2. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2021 Mar;19(3):141-154. doi: 10.1038/s41579-020-00459-7. Epub 
2020 Oct 6.

Characteristics of SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19.

Hu B(#)(1), Guo H(#)(1)(2), Zhou P(1), Shi ZL(3).

Author information:
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Special Pathogens and Biosafety, Wuhan Institute of 
Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, People's Republic of China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, People's Republic of 
China.
(3)CAS Key Laboratory of Special Pathogens and Biosafety, Wuhan Institute of 
Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, People's Republic of China. 
zlshi@wh.iov.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Nat Rev Microbiol. 2022 May;20(5):315. doi: 10.1038/s41579-022-00711-2.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is a highly 
transmissible and pathogenic coronavirus that emerged in late 2019 and has 
caused a pandemic of acute respiratory disease, named 'coronavirus disease 2019' 
(COVID-19), which threatens human health and public safety. In this Review, we 
describe the basic virology of SARS-CoV-2, including genomic characteristics and 
receptor use, highlighting its key difference from previously known 
coronaviruses. We summarize current knowledge of clinical, epidemiological and 
pathological features of COVID-19, as well as recent progress in animal models 
and antiviral treatment approaches for SARS-CoV-2 infection. We also discuss the 
potential wildlife hosts and zoonotic origin of this emerging virus in detail.

DOI: 10.1038/s41579-020-00459-7
PMCID: PMC7537588
PMID: 33024307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


3. Nat Immunol. 2022 Feb;23(2):194-202. doi: 10.1038/s41590-021-01104-y. Epub 2022 
Feb 1.

Pathological sequelae of long-haul COVID.

Mehandru S(1)(2), Merad M(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Precision Immunology Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY, USA. saurabh.mehandru@mssm.edu.
(2)Henry D. Janowitz Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Icahn 
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. saurabh.mehandru@mssm.edu.
(3)Precision Immunology Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY, USA. miriam.merad@mssm.edu.
(4)Department of Oncological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York, NY, USA. miriam.merad@mssm.edu.

The world continues to contend with successive waves of coronavirus disease 2019 
(COVID-19), fueled by the emergence of viral variants. At the same time, 
persistent, prolonged and often debilitating sequelae are increasingly 
recognized in convalescent individuals, named 'post-COVID-19 syndrome' or 
'long-haul COVID'. Clinical symptomatology includes fatigue, malaise, dyspnea, 
defects in memory and concentration and a variety of neuropsychiatric syndromes 
as the major manifestations, and several organ systems can be involved. The 
underlying pathophysiological mechanisms are poorly understood at present. This 
Review details organ-specific sequelae of post-COVID-19 syndromes and examines 
the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms available so far, elaborating on 
persistent inflammation, induced autoimmunity and putative viral reservoirs. 
Finally, we propose diagnostic strategies to better understand this 
heterogeneous disorder that continues to afflict millions of people worldwide.

© 2022. Springer Nature America, Inc.

DOI: 10.1038/s41590-021-01104-y
PMCID: PMC9127978
PMID: 35105985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests M.M. and S.M. declare no 
conflicts of interest relating to this work.


4. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Feb 2;23(3):1716. doi: 10.3390/ijms23031716.

SARS-CoV-2-Specific Immune Response and the Pathogenesis of COVID-19.

Gusev E(1), Sarapultsev A(1)(2), Solomatina L(1), Chereshnev V(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Immunology of Inflammation, Institute of Immunology and 
Physiology, Ural Branch of the Russian Academy of Science, 620049 Ekaterinburg, 
Russia.
(2)Russian-Chinese Education and Research Center of System Pathology, South Ural 
State University, 454080 Chelyabinsk, Russia.

The review aims to consolidate research findings on the molecular mechanisms and 
virulence and pathogenicity characteristics of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) 
causative agent, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), 
and their relevance to four typical stages in the development of acute viral 
infection. These four stages are invasion; primary blockade of antiviral innate 
immunity; engagement of the virus's protection mechanisms against the factors of 
adaptive immunity; and acute, long-term complications of COVID-19. The invasion 
stage entails the recognition of the spike protein (S) of SARS-CoV-2 target cell 
receptors, namely, the main receptor (angiotensin-converting enzyme 2, ACE2), 
its coreceptors, and potential alternative receptors. The presence of a diverse 
repertoire of receptors allows SARS-CoV-2 to infect various types of cells, 
including those not expressing ACE2. During the second stage, the majority of 
the polyfunctional structural, non-structural, and extra proteins SARS-CoV-2 
synthesizes in infected cells are involved in the primary blockage of antiviral 
innate immunity. A high degree of redundancy and systemic action characterizing 
these pathogenic factors allows SARS-CoV-2 to overcome antiviral mechanisms at 
the initial stages of invasion. The third stage includes passive and active 
protection of the virus from factors of adaptive immunity, overcoming of the 
barrier function at the focus of inflammation, and generalization of SARS-CoV-2 
in the body. The fourth stage is associated with the deployment of variants of 
acute and long-term complications of COVID-19. SARS-CoV-2's ability to induce 
autoimmune and autoinflammatory pathways of tissue invasion and development of 
both immunosuppressive and hyperergic mechanisms of systemic inflammation is 
critical at this stage of infection.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23031716
PMCID: PMC8835786
PMID: 35163638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.


5. J Gene Med. 2021 Feb;23(2):e3303. doi: 10.1002/jgm.3303. Epub 2021 Jan 6.

COVID-19: Virology, biology and novel laboratory diagnosis.

Mohamadian M(1)(2), Chiti H(3), Shoghli A(4), Biglari S(5), Parsamanesh N(3), 
Esmaeilzadeh A(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Birjand University of Medical Sciences, 
Birjand, Iran.
(2)Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Birjand University of Medical 
Sciences, Birjand, Iran.
(3)Zanjan Metabolic Diseases Research Center, Zanjan University of Medical 
Sciences, Zanjan, Iran.
(4)Social Determinants of Health Research Center, Zanjan University of Medical 
Sciences, Zanjan, Iran.
(5)School of Medicine, Zanjan University of Medical Sciences, Zanjan, Iran.
(6)Department of Immunology, Zanjan University of Medical Science, Zanjan, Iran.
(7)Cancer Gene Therapy Research Center, Zanjan University of Medical Science, 
Zanjan, Iran.

BACKGROUND: At the end of December 2019, a novel coronavirus tentatively named 
SARS-CoV-2 in Wuhan, a central city in China, was announced by the World Health 
Organization. SARS-CoV-2 is an RNA virus that has become a major public health 
concern after the outbreak of the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome-CoV 
(MERS-CoV) and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome-CoV (SARS-CoV) in 2002 and 
2012, respectively. As of 29 October 2020, the total number of COVID-19 cases 
had reached over 44 million worldwide, with more than 1.17 million confirmed 
deaths.
DISCUSSION: SARS-CoV-2 infected patients usually present with severe viral 
pneumonia. Similar to SARS-CoV, the virus enters respiratory tract cells via the 
angiotensin-converting enzyme receptor 2. The structural proteins play an 
essential role in budding the virus particles released from different host 
cells. To date, an approved vaccine or treatment option of a preventive 
character to avoid severe courses of COVID-19 is still not available.
CONCLUSIONS: In the present study, we provide a brief review of the general 
biological features of CoVs and explain the pathogenesis, clinical symptoms and 
diagnostic approaches regarding monitoring future infectivity and prevent 
emerging COVID-19 infections.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/jgm.3303
PMCID: PMC7883242
PMID: 33305456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.


6. Curr Med Sci. 2021 Dec;41(6):1037-1051. doi: 10.1007/s11596-021-2395-1. Epub 
2021 Jul 9.

A Comprehensive Review of COVID-19 Virology, Vaccines, Variants, and 
Therapeutics.

Forchette L(#)(1), Sebastian W(#)(1), Liu T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, West Virginia School of Osteopathic 
Medicine, 400 Lee Street North, Lewisburg, West Virginia, 24901, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, West Virginia School of Osteopathic 
Medicine, 400 Lee Street North, Lewisburg, West Virginia, 24901, USA. 
tliu@osteo.wvsom.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the causative 
pathogen of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), has caused more than 179 
million infections and 3.8 million deaths worldwide. Throughout the past year, 
multiple vaccines have already been developed and used, while some others are in 
the process of being developed. However, the emergence of new mutant strains of 
SARS-CoV-2 that have demonstrated immune-evading characteristics and an increase 
in infective capabilities leads to potential ineffectiveness of the vaccines 
against these variants. The purpose of this review article is to highlight the 
current understanding of the immunological mechanisms of the virus and vaccines, 
as well as to investigate some key variants and mutations of the virus driving 
the current pandemic and their impacts on current management guidelines. We also 
discussed new technologies being developed for the prevention, treatment, and 
detection of SARS-CoV-2. In this paper, we thoroughly reviewed and provided 
crucial information on SARS-CoV-2 virology, vaccines and drugs being used and 
developed for its prevention and treatment, as well as important variant 
strains. Our review paper will be beneficial to health care professionals and 
researchers so they can have a better understanding of the basic sciences, 
prevention, and clinical treatment of COVID-19 during the pandemic. This paper 
consists of the most updated information that has been available as of June 21, 
2021.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11596-021-2395-1
PMCID: PMC8267225
PMID: 34241776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Med Virol. 2021 May;93(5):2735-2739. doi: 10.1002/jmv.26826. Epub 2021 Feb 9.

Role of Toll-like receptors in the pathogenesis of COVID-19.

Khanmohammadi S(1)(2), Rezaei N(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Research Center for Immunodeficiencies, Children's Medical Center, Tehran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Network of Immunity in Infection, Malignancy and Autoimmunity (NIIMA), 
Universal Scientific Education and Research Network (USERN), Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), has led to a pandemic since March 2020. The exact 
pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 and the role of each component of the innate and 
adaptive immune system is still unknown. However, available data from other 
coronavirus families, such as SARS-CoV and the Middle East respiratory 
syndrome and also new findings could be useful for a better understanding of 
SARS-CoV-2. Toll-like receptors (TLR) play an important role in recognition of 
viral particles and activation of the innate immune system. Activation of TLR 
pathways leads to secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as 
interleukin-1 (IL-1), IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor-α, as well as type 1 
interferon. Different TLRs, like TLR2, TLR3, TLR4, TLR6, TLR7, TLR8, and TLR9 
are potentially important in COVID-19 infection. It is also worth mentioning 
that we should bear in mind both the beneficial and harmful effects of TLR in 
confronting COVID-19 infection. TLRs could be a potential target in controlling 
the infection in the early stages of disease and production of vaccine against 
SARS-CoV-2.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.26826
PMCID: PMC8014260
PMID: 33506952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflict 
of interests.


8. Horm Mol Biol Clin Investig. 2021 Feb 23;42(1):69-75. doi: 
10.1515/hmbci-2020-0069.

COVID-19 and neurology perspective.

Singh S(1), Ahirwar AK(2), Asia P(2), Gopal N(2), Kaim K(3), Ahirwar P(4).

Author information:
(1)All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Nagpur, Maharashtra, India.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Nagpur, 
Maharashtra, India.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Indira Gandhi ESI Hospital, New Delhi, India.
(4)Department of Radio-diagnosis, Index Medical College, Hospital and Research 
Centre, Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India.

COVID-19 caused by SARS CoV2 (The novel corona virus) has already taken lives of 
many people across the globe even more than anyone could have imagined. This 
outbreak occurred in China and since then it is expanding its devastating 
effects by leaps and bounds. Initially it appeared to be an outbreak of 
pneumonia but soon it was found to be much more than that and the infectivity 
was found to be very high. This is the reason that it has taken whole globe in 
its trap and become a pandemic in such a short span of time. Death is occurring 
because it is a new virus and human body has no specific antibodies for it. 
Presently there is no approved vaccine so everyone is susceptible but people 
with co-morbidities appear to be in more risk and the best way for protection is 
social distancing and increasing one's natural immunity by taking healthy diet 
and exercise. When a person is infected the clinical presentation ranges from 
asymptomatic to severe ARDS, sudden onset of anosmia, headache, cough may be the 
initial symptoms. This review is focused on immunopathology and effect of 
COVID-19 on neurological disorders and also the neurological manifestations and 
the treatment.

© 2021 Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin/Boston.

DOI: 10.1515/hmbci-2020-0069
PMID: 33617700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Biomed Sci. 2021 Jan 12;28(1):9. doi: 10.1186/s12929-020-00703-5.

Insights to SARS-CoV-2 life cycle, pathophysiology, and rationalized treatments 
that target COVID-19 clinical complications.

Trougakos IP(1), Stamatelopoulos K(2), Terpos E(2), Tsitsilonis OE(3), Aivalioti 
E(2), Paraskevis D(4), Kastritis E(2), Pavlakis GN(5), Dimopoulos MA(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Biophysics, Faculty of Biology, National and 
Kapodistrian University of Athens, 15784, Athens, Greece. 
itrougakos@biol.uoa.gr.
(2)Department of Clinical Therapeutics, School of Medicine, National and 
Kapodistrian University of Athens, 11528, Athens, Greece.
(3)Department of Animal and Human Physiology, Faculty of Biology, National and 
Kapodistrian University of Athens, 15784, Athens, Greece.
(4)Department of Hygiene, Epidemiology and Medical Statistics, School of 
Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 11527, Athens, Greece.
(5)Human Retrovirus Section, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD, 21702, 
USA.
(6)Department of Clinical Therapeutics, School of Medicine, National and 
Kapodistrian University of Athens, 11528, Athens, Greece. mdimop@med.uoa.gr.

BACKGROUND: Gaining further insights into SARS-CoV-2 routes of infection and the 
underlying pathobiology of COVID-19 will support the design of rational 
treatments targeting the life cycle of the virus and/or the adverse effects 
(e.g., multi-organ collapse) that are triggered by COVID-19-mediated adult 
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and/or other pathologies.
MAIN BODY: COVID-19 is a two-phase disease being marked by (phase 1) increased 
virus transmission and infection rates due to the wide expression of the main 
infection-related ACE2, TMPRSS2 and CTSB/L human genes in tissues of the 
respiratory and gastrointestinal tract, as well as by (phase 2) host- and 
probably sex- and/or age-specific uncontrolled inflammatory immune responses 
which drive hyper-cytokinemia, aggressive inflammation and (due to broad 
organotropism of SARS-CoV-2) collateral tissue damage and systemic failure 
likely because of imbalanced ACE/ANGII/AT1R and ACE2/ANG(1-7)/MASR axes 
signaling.
CONCLUSION: Here we discuss SARS-CoV-2 life cycle and a number of approaches 
aiming to suppress viral infection rates or propagation; increase virus antigen 
presentation in order to activate a robust and durable adaptive immune response 
from the host, and/or mitigate the ARDS-related "cytokine storm" and collateral 
tissue damage that triggers the severe life-threatening complications of 
COVID-19.

DOI: 10.1186/s12929-020-00703-5
PMCID: PMC7801873
PMID: 33435929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests for this article.


10. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2021 Dec;10(1):507-535. doi: 
10.1080/22221751.2021.1898291.

Lessons learned 1 year after SARS-CoV-2 emergence leading to COVID-19 pandemic.

To KK(1)(2)(3)(4), Sridhar S(1)(2)(3)(4), Chiu KH(4), Hung DL(4), Li X(4), Hung 
IF(5), Tam AR(5), Chung TW(4), Chan JF(1)(2)(3)(4), Zhang AJ(1)(2)(3), Cheng 
VC(4), Yuen KY(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Emerging Infectious Diseases, The University of Hong 
Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, People's Republic of 
China.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University 
of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, People's 
Republic of China.
(3)Carol Yu Centre for Infection, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The 
University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, 
People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Queen Mary Hospital, Pokfulam, Hong Kong Special 
Administrative Region, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Medicine, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of 
Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, People's Republic 
of China.

Without modern medical management and vaccines, the severity of the Coronavirus 
Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome 
(SARS) coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) might approach the magnitude of 1894-plague 
(12 million deaths) and 1918-A(H1N1) influenza (50 million deaths) pandemics. 
The COVID-19 pandemic was heralded by the 2003 SARS epidemic which led to the 
discovery of human and civet SARS-CoV-1, bat SARS-related-CoVs, Middle East 
respiratory syndrome (MERS)-related bat CoV HKU4 and HKU5, and other novel 
animal coronaviruses. The suspected animal-to-human jumping of 4 
betacoronaviruses including the human coronaviruses OC43(1890), 
SARS-CoV-1(2003), MERS-CoV(2012), and SARS-CoV-2(2019) indicates their 
significant pandemic potential. The presence of a large reservoir of 
coronaviruses in bats and other wild mammals, culture of mixing and selling them 
in urban markets with suboptimal hygiene, habit of eating exotic mammals in 
highly populated areas, and the rapid and frequent air travels from these areas 
are perfect ingredients for brewing rapidly exploding epidemics. The possibility 
of emergence of a hypothetical SARS-CoV-3 or other novel viruses from animals or 
laboratories, and therefore needs for global preparedness should not be ignored. 
We reviewed representative publications on the epidemiology, virology, clinical 
manifestations, pathology, laboratory diagnostics, treatment, vaccination, and 
infection control of COVID-19 as of 20 January 2021, which is 1 year after 
person-to-person transmission of SARS-CoV-2 was announced. The difficulties of 
mass testing, labour-intensive contact tracing, importance of compliance to 
universal masking, low efficacy of antiviral treatment for severe disease, 
possibilities of vaccine or antiviral-resistant virus variants and SARS-CoV-2 
becoming another common cold coronavirus are discussed.

DOI: 10.1080/22221751.2021.1898291
PMCID: PMC8006950
PMID: 33666147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JFWC has received travel grants from Pfizer 
Corporation Hong Kong and Astellas Pharma Hong Kong Corporation Limited, and was 
an invited speaker for Gilead Sciences Hong Kong Limited and Luminex 
Corporation. The other authors declared no conflict of interests. The funding 
sources had no role in study design, data collection, analysis or interpretation 
or writing of the report. The corresponding authors had full access to all the 
data in the study and had final responsibility for the decision to submit for 
publication.


11. Virology. 2020 Dec;551:1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2020.08.011. Epub 2020 Sep 24.

The novel coronavirus Disease-2019 (COVID-19): Mechanism of action, detection 
and recent therapeutic strategies.

Seyed Hosseini E(1), Riahi Kashani N(2), Nikzad H(3), Azadbakht J(4), Hassani 
Bafrani H(5), Haddad Kashani H(6).

Author information:
(1)Anatomical Sciences Research Center, Basic Sciences Research Institute, 
Kashan University of Medical Sciences, Kashan, Iran; Gametogenesis Research 
Center, Kashan University of Medical Sciences, Kashan, Iran. Electronic address: 
elaheir.66@gmail.com.
(2)Anatomical Sciences Research Center, Basic Sciences Research Institute, 
Kashan University of Medical Sciences, Kashan, Iran; Gametogenesis Research 
Center, Kashan University of Medical Sciences, Kashan, Iran. Electronic address: 
riahir@yahoo.com.
(3)Anatomical Sciences Research Center, Basic Sciences Research Institute, 
Kashan University of Medical Sciences, Kashan, Iran; Gametogenesis Research 
Center, Kashan University of Medical Sciences, Kashan, Iran. Electronic address: 
nikzad.kaums@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Radiology, Faculty of Medicin, Kashan University of Medical 
Sciences, Kashan, Iran. Electronic address: javidazadbakht2@gmail.com.
(5)Anatomical Sciences Research Center, Basic Sciences Research Institute, 
Kashan University of Medical Sciences, Kashan, Iran; Gametogenesis Research 
Center, Kashan University of Medical Sciences, Kashan, Iran. Electronic address: 
hassanibafrani.h@gmail.com.
(6)Anatomical Sciences Research Center, Basic Sciences Research Institute, 
Kashan University of Medical Sciences, Kashan, Iran; Gametogenesis Research 
Center, Kashan University of Medical Sciences, Kashan, Iran. Electronic address: 
hamedir2010@gmail.com.

Novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, designated as COVID-19 by the World Health 
Organization (WHO) on the February 11, 2020, is one of the highly pathogenic 
β-coronaviruses which infects human. Early diagnosis of COVID-19 is the most 
critical step to treat infection. The diagnostic tools are generally molecular 
methods, serology and viral culture. Recently CRISPR-based method has been 
investigated to diagnose and treat coronavirus infection. The emergence of 
2019-nCoV during the influenza season, has led to the extensive use of 
antibiotics and neuraminidase enzyme inhibitors, taken orally and intravenously. 
Currently, antiviral inhibitors of SARS and MERS spike proteins, neuraminidase 
inhibitors, anti-inflammatory drugs and EK1 peptide are the available 
therapeutic options for SARS-CoV-2 infected individuals. In addition, 
Chloroquine, which was previously used for malarial and autoimmune disease, has 
shown efficacy in the 2019-nCoV infection treatment. In severe hypoxaemia, a 
combination of antibiotics, α-interferon, lopinavir and mechanical ventilation 
can effectively mitigate the symptoms. Comprehensive knowledge on the innate and 
adaptive immune responses, will make it possible to propose potent antiviral 
drugs with their effective therapeutic measures for the prevention of viral 
infection. This therapeutic strategy will help patients worldwide to protect 
themselves against severe and fatal viral infections, that potentially can 
evolve and develop drug resistance, and to reduce mortality rates.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2020.08.011
PMCID: PMC7513802
PMID: 33010669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared that they have no competing 
interests.


12. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2021 Dec;42(6):839-858. doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1740110. 
Epub 2021 Dec 16.

COVID-19 in Immunocompromised Patients: A Systematic Review.

Stainer A(1)(2), Amati F(1)(2), Suigo G(2), Simonetta E(3)(4), Gramegna A(3)(4), 
Voza A(1)(5), Aliberti S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Pieve Emanuele, 
Milan, Italy.
(2)Respiratory Unit, IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, Rozzano, Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy.
(4)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Respiratory 
Department, Milan, Italy.
(5)Emergency Medicine Unit, IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, Rozzano, Milan, 
Italy.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) was first 
identified as a novel coronavirus in Wuhan, Hubei province, central China, in 
December 2019, and is responsible for the 2019-to-present pandemic. According to 
the most recent data released by the World Health Organization, more than 200 
million people have been infected by SARS-CoV-2 so far, and more than 4 million 
people died worldwide. Although our knowledge on SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19 is 
constantly growing, data on COVID-19 in immunocompromised patients are still 
limited. The aim of the present systematic review is to describe clinical 
picture, disease severity, proposed treatment regimen, and response to 
vaccination in patients with different types and severity of immunosuppression.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0041-1740110
PMID: 34918325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


13. Biochimie. 2020 Dec;179:85-100. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2020.09.018. Epub 2020 Sep 
22.

The emergence of COVID-19 as a global pandemic: Understanding the epidemiology, 
immune response and potential therapeutic targets of SARS-CoV-2.

Muralidar S(1), Ambi SV(2), Sekaran S(3), Krishnan UM(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Chemical and Biotechnology, SASTRA Deemed-to-be-University, 
Thanjavur, 613401, Tamil Nadu, India.
(2)School of Chemical and Biotechnology, SASTRA Deemed-to-be-University, 
Thanjavur, 613401, Tamil Nadu, India. Electronic address: 
senthilvisagaambi@scbt.sastra.edu.
(3)School of Chemical and Biotechnology, SASTRA Deemed-to-be-University, 
Thanjavur, 613401, Tamil Nadu, India; Centre for Nanotechnology & Advanced 
Biomaterials (CeNTAB), School of Chemical and Biotechnology, SASTRA 
Deemed-to-be-University, Thanjavur, 613401, Tamil Nadu, India.
(4)School of Chemical and Biotechnology, SASTRA Deemed-to-be-University, 
Thanjavur, 613401, Tamil Nadu, India; Centre for Nanotechnology & Advanced 
Biomaterials (CeNTAB), School of Chemical and Biotechnology, SASTRA 
Deemed-to-be-University, Thanjavur, 613401, Tamil Nadu, India; School of Arts, 
Science & Technology (SASH), SASTRA Deemed-to-be-University, Thanjavur, 613401, 
Tamil Nadu, India.

An acute respiratory disease caused by a severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) that surfaced in China in late 2019, continues to 
spread rapidly across the globe causing serious concerns. The coronavirus 
disease 2019 (COVID-19) is declared as a public health emergency worldwide by 
the World Health Organization (WHO). Increasing evidences have demonstrated 
human-to-human transmission that primarily affects the upper respiratory tract 
followed by lower respiratory tract damage leading to severe pneumonia. Based on 
the current status, the elderly population and people with prior co-morbidities 
are highly susceptible to serious health effects including cytokine 
up-regulation and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Currently, 
COVID-19 research is still in the preliminary stage necessitating rigorous 
studies. There is no specific drug or vaccine targeting SARS-CoV-2 currently and 
only symptomatic treatment is being administered, but several antivirals are 
under active investigation. In this review, we have summarized the epidemiology, 
entry mechanism, immune response, and therapeutic implications, possible drug 
targets, their ongoing clinical trials, and put forward vital questions to offer 
new directions to the COVID-19 research.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. and Société Française de Biochimie et Biologie 
Moléculaire (SFBBM). All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biochi.2020.09.018
PMCID: PMC7505773
PMID: 32971147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no conflict of interest.


14. ChemMedChem. 2021 Aug 5;16(15):2288-2314. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.202100079. Epub 2021 
Jun 22.

Science's Response to CoVID-19.

Long MJC(1), Aye Y(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Lausanne, 1015, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(2)Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne (EPFL), 1015, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.

CoVID-19 is a multi-symptomatic disease which has made a global impact due to 
its ability to spread rapidly, and its relatively high mortality rate. Beyond 
the heroic efforts to develop vaccines, which we do not discuss herein, the 
response of scientists and clinicians to this complex problem has reflected the 
need to detect CoVID-19 rapidly, to diagnose patients likely to show adverse 
symptoms, and to treat severe and critical CoVID-19. Here we aim to encapsulate 
these varied and sometimes conflicting approaches and the resulting data in 
terms of chemistry and biology. In the process we highlight emerging concepts, 
and potential future applications that may arise out of this immense effort.

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/cmdc.202100079
PMCID: PMC8250914
PMID: 33811458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


15. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2021 Dec;42(6):737-746. doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1741371. 
Epub 2021 Dec 16.

COVID-19 in Children: Update on Diagnosis and Management.

Esposito S(1), Abate L(1), Laudisio SR(1), Ciuni A(2), Cella S(2), Sverzellati 
N(2), Principi N(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, Paediatric Clinic, 
Pietro Barilla Children's Hospital, Parma, Italy.
(2)Unit of Paediatric Radiology, Department of Medicine and Surgery, University 
of Parma, Pietro Barilla Children's Hospital, Parma, Italy.
(3)Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy.

In December 2019, a new infectious disease called coronavirus disease 2019 
(COVID-19) attributed to the new virus named severe scute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) was detected. The gold standard for the diagnosis of 
SARS-CoV-2 infection is the viral identification in nasopharyngeal swab by 
real-time polymerase chain reaction. Few data on the role of imaging are 
available in the pediatric population. Similarly, considering that symptomatic 
therapy is adequate in most of the pediatric patients with COVID-19, few 
pediatric pharmacological studies are available. The main aim of this review is 
to describe and discuss the scientific literature on various imaging approaches 
and therapeutic management in children and adolescents affected by COVID-19. 
Clinical manifestations of COVID-19 are less severe in children than in adults 
and as a consequence the radiologic findings are less marked. If imaging is 
needed, chest radiography is the first imaging modality of choice in the 
presence of moderate-to-severe symptoms. Regarding therapy, acetaminophen or 
ibuprofen are appropriate for the vast majority of pediatric patients. Other 
drugs should be prescribed following an appropriate individualized approach. Due 
to the characteristics of COVID-19 in pediatric age, the importance of 
strengthening the network between hospital and territorial pediatrics for an 
appropriate diagnosis and therapeutic management represents a priority.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0041-1741371
PMID: 34918317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.


16. Hong Kong Med J. 2021 Apr;27(2):157-159. doi: 10.12809/hkmj209056. Epub 2021 Apr 
9.

COVID-19-associated pancreatic dysfunction.

Abdel-Moneim A(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Physiology Division, Faculty of Science, Beni-Suef University, 
Beni-Suef, Egypt.

DOI: 10.12809/hkmj209056
PMID: 33843611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author has disclosed no conflicts of 
interest.


17. J Biol Rhythms. 2021 Feb;36(1):3. doi: 10.1177/0748730421993352. Epub 2021 Feb 
5.

Chronobiology in response to COVID-19.

Cermakian N, Harrington ME.

DOI: 10.1177/0748730421993352
PMID: 33543668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Brief Bioinform. 2022 Jan 17;23(1):bbab485. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbab485.

Multiomics integration-based molecular characterizations of COVID-19.

Li CX(1)(2), Gao J(1)(3)(4), Zhang Z(5), Chen L(5), Li X(2)(4)(6)(7), Zhou M(5), 
Wheelock ÅM(1).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine & Centre for Molecular 
Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)The First Hospital of Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China.
(3)Heart and Lung Centre, Department of Pulmonary Medicine, University of 
Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(4)The First School of Clinical Medicine, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China.
(5)School of Biomedical Engineering, School of Ophthalmology & Optometry and Eye 
Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, China.
(6)Department of General Surgery, The First Hospital of Lanzhou University, 
Lanzhou, China.
(7)Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Regenerative Medicine of Gansu Province, The 
First Hospital of Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China.

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, caused by the severe acute 
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), rapidly became a global health 
challenge, leading to unprecedented social and economic consequences. The 
mechanisms behind the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 are both unique and complex. 
Omics-scale studies are emerging rapidly and offer a tremendous potential to 
unravel the puzzle of SARS-CoV-2 pathobiology, as well as moving forward with 
diagnostics, potential drug targets, risk stratification, therapeutic responses, 
vaccine development and therapeutic innovation. This review summarizes various 
aspects of understanding multiomics integration-based molecular 
characterizations of COVID-19, which to date include the integration of 
transcriptomics, proteomics, genomics, lipidomics, immunomics and metabolomics 
to explore virus targets and developing suitable therapeutic solutions through 
systems biology tools. Furthermore, this review also covers an abridgment of 
omics investigations related to disease pathogenesis and virulence, the role of 
host genetic variation and a broad array of immune and inflammatory phenotypes 
contributing to understanding COVID-19 traits. Insights into this review, which 
combines existing strategies and multiomics integration profiling, may help 
further advance our knowledge of COVID-19.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbab485
PMCID: PMC8769889
PMID: 34864875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Viruses. 2021 Oct 18;13(10):2098. doi: 10.3390/v13102098.

COVID-19 in 2021.

Lundstrom K(1), Aljabali AAA(2).

Author information:
(1)PanTherapeutics, 1095 Lutry, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutics and Pharmaceutical Technology, Faculty of 
Pharmacy, Yarmouk University, Irbid 21163, Jordan.

The Special Issue on Vaccines and Therapeutics against Coronaviruses, which was 
launched in early 2021, has attracted the scientific community at large, and 
more than 20 manuscripts have been accepted for publication.[...].

DOI: 10.3390/v13102098
PMCID: PMC8539425
PMID: 34696528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


20. Int Immunopharmacol. 2021 Jan;90:107247. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2020.107247. Epub 
2020 Dec 2.

COVID-19 and cancer: From basic mechanisms to vaccine development using 
nanotechnology.

Han HJ(1), Nwagwu C(2), Anyim O(3), Ekweremadu C(4), Kim S(5).

Author information:
(1)University College London, Department of Neonatology, United Kingdom. 
Electronic address: uclqhjh@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutics, University of Nigeria Nsukka, Nigeria. 
Electronic address: chinekwu.nwobi@unn.edu.ng.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Nigeria Teaching Hospital 
Ituku-Ozalla, Enugu, Nigeria.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutics and Pharmaceutical Technology Enugu State 
University of Science and Technology, Nigeria. Electronic address: 
Chinedu.ekweremadu.17@alumni.ucl.ac.uk.
(5)Basildon and Thurrock University Hospital, United Kingdom. Electronic 
address: san.kim@btuh.nhs.uk.

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), is a global pandemic which has induced unprecedented 
ramifications, severely affecting our society due to the long incubation time, 
unpredictably high prevalence and lack of effective vaccines. One of the 
interesting notions is that there is an association between COVID-19 and cancer. 
Cancer patients seem to exhibit exacerbated conditions and a higher mortality 
rate when exposed to the virus. Therefore, vaccines are the promising solution 
to minimise the problem amongst cancer patients threatened by the new viral 
strains. However, there are still limitations to be considered, including the 
efficacy of COVID vaccines for immunocompromised individuals, possible 
interactions between the vaccine and cancer, and personalised medicine. Not only 
to eradicate the pandemic, but also to make it more effective for 
immunocompromised patients who are suffering from cancer, a successful vaccine 
platform is required through the implementation of nanotechnology which can also 
enable scalable manufacturing and worldwide distribution along with its faster 
and precise delivery. In this review, we summarise the current understanding of 
COVID-19 with clinical perspectives, highlighting the association between 
COVID-19 and cancer, followed by a vaccine development for this association 
using nanotechnology. We suggest different administration methods for the 
COVID-19 vaccine formulation options. This study will contribute to paving the 
way towards the prevention and treatment of COVID-19, especially for the 
immunocompromised individuals.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2020.107247
PMCID: PMC7709613
PMID: 33307513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared that there is no conflict 
of interest.


21. Anaesth Crit Care Pain Med. 2021 Feb;40(1):100802. doi: 
10.1016/j.accpm.2021.100802. Epub 2021 Jan 14.

COVID-19 Pandemic: the story is not over yet.

Piarroux R(1), Gaudart J(2), Rebaudet S(3).

Author information:
(1)Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France; IPLESP, Sorbonne 
Université, 27 rue Chaligny 75571 Paris Cedex 12, France. Electronic address: 
renaud.piarroux@aphp.fr.
(2)Aix Marseille Univ, INSERM, IRD, AP-HM, SESSTIM, UMR1252, La Timone, BioSTIC, 
27, Boulevard Jean Moulin, 13005, Marseille, France.
(3)Aix Marseille Univ, INSERM, IRD, AP-HM, SESSTIM, UMR1252, La Timone, BioSTIC, 
27, Boulevard Jean Moulin, 13005, Marseille, France; Hôpital Européen, 6, rue 
Désirée Clary, 13003 Marseille, France.

DOI: 10.1016/j.accpm.2021.100802
PMCID: PMC7808731
PMID: 33454391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. FEBS J. 2021 Sep;288(17):4996-5009. doi: 10.1111/febs.16094. Epub 2021 Jul 19.

COVID-19 vaccines: what do we know so far?

Dhillon P(1), Altmann D(2), Male V(3).

Author information:
(1)The FEBS Journal Editorial Office, Cambridge, UK.
(2)Department of Immunology and Inflammation, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial 
College London, Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK.
(3)Department of Metabolism, Digestion and Reproduction, Imperial College 
London, Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, London, UK.

When the novel coronavirus was described in late 2019, it could not have been 
imagined that within a year, more than 100 vaccine candidates would be in 
preclinical development and several would be in clinical trials and even 
approved for use. The scale of the COVID-19 outbreak pushed the scientific 
community, working in collaboration with pharmaceutical companies, public health 
bodies, policymakers, funders and governments, to develop vaccines against 
SARS-CoV-2 at record-breaking speed. As well as driving major amendments to the 
usual timeframe for bringing a vaccine to fruition, the pandemic has accelerated 
the development of next-generation technologies for vaccinology, giving rise to 
two frontrunner RNA vaccines. Although none of the critical safety and efficacy 
steps have been skipped within the compressed schedules, and the technologies 
underpinning the novel vaccines have been refined by scientists over many years, 
a significant proportion of the global population is sceptical of the benefits 
of COVID-19 vaccines and wary of potential risks. In this interview-based 
article, we give an overview of how the vaccines were developed and how they 
work to generate a robust immune response against COVID-19, as well as 
addressing common questions relating to safety and efficacy.

© 2021 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.16094
PMCID: PMC8420457
PMID: 34288409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Danny Altmann receives remuneration as a 
Consultant to Oxford Immunotec Ltd. The authors have no other conflicts of 
interest to declare.


23. J Diabetes Investig. 2021 Jul;12(7):1125-1127. doi: 10.1111/jdi.13605.

The COVID-19 world - Are we there yet?

Hamamoto Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Yutaka Seino Distinguished Center for Diabetes Research, Kansai Electric 
Power Medical Research Institute, Kobe, Japan.
(2)Center for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Kansai Electric Power 
Hospital, Osaka, Japan.

The spreading of SARS-CoV-2 virus infection is still of great concern as well as 
clinical and social interest. The key to conquer this pandemic would be 
establishment of herd immunity by vaccination and of treatment, and I have 
discussed issues we are facing now.

© 2021 The Authors. Journal of Diabetes Investigation published by Asian 
Association for the Study of Diabetes (AASD) and John Wiley & Sons Australia, 
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jdi.13605
PMCID: PMC8242779
PMID: 34056843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Y Hamamoto received speaker fees from Novo 
Nordisk Pharma Ltd and received a research grant from Sumitomo‐Dainippon Pharma 
Co., Ltd and Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim.


24. Int J Mol Med. 2021 Jan;47(1):3-22. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2020.4794. Epub 2020 Nov 
20.

Approaches towards fighting the COVID‑19 pandemic (Review).

Tsai SC(1), Lu CC(2), Bau DT(3), Chiu YJ(4), Yen YT(5), Hsu YM(1), Fu CW(6), Kuo 
SC(7), Lo YS(8), Chiu HY(9), Juan YN(8), Tsai FJ(10), Yang JS(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, China Medical University, 
Taichung 40402, Taiwan, R.O.C.
(2)Department of Sport Performance, National Taiwan University of Sport, 
Taichung 40402, Taiwan, R.O.C.
(3)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, China Medical University, Taichung 
40402, Taiwan, R.O.C.
(4)Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Department of Surgery, Taipei 
Veteran General Hospital, Taipei 11217, Taiwan, R.O.C.
(5)Drug Development Center, Institute of New Drug Development, China Medical 
University, Taichung 40402, Taiwan, R.O.C.
(6)Biomedical Technology and Device Research Laboratories, Industrial Technology 
Research Institute, Hsinchu 310401, Taiwan, R.O.C.
(7)School of Pharmacy, China Medical University, Taichung 40402, Taiwan, R.O.C.
(8)Department of Medical Research, China Medical University Hospital, China 
Medical University, Taichung 40447, Taiwan, R.O.C.
(9)Department of Pharmacy, Buddhist Tzu Chi General Hospital, Hualien 97002, 
Taiwan, R.O.C.
(10)School of Chinese Medicine, College of Chinese Medicine, China Medical 
University, Taichung 40402, Taiwan, R.O.C.

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID‑19) outbreak, which has caused >46 millions 
confirmed infections and >1.2 million coronavirus related deaths, is one of the 
most devastating worldwide crises in recent years. Infection with COVID‑19 
results in a fever, dry cough, general fatigue, respiratory symptoms, diarrhoea 
and a sore throat, similar to those of acute respiratory distress syndrome. The 
causative agent of COVID‑19, SARS‑CoV‑2, is a novel coronavirus strain. To date, 
remdesivir has been granted emergency use authorization for use in the 
management of infection. Additionally, several efficient diagnostic tools are 
being actively developed, and novel drugs and vaccines are being evaluated for 
their efficacy as therapeutic agents against COVID‑19, or in the prevention of 
infection. The present review highlights the prevalent clinical manifestations 
of COVID‑19, characterizes the SARS‑CoV‑2 viral genome sequence and life cycle, 
highlights the optimal methods for preventing viral transmission, and discusses 
possible molecular pharmacological mechanisms and approaches in the development 
of anti‑SARS‑CoV‑2 therapeutic agents. In addition, the use of traditional 
Chinese medicines for management of COVID‑19 is discussed. It is expected that 
novel anti‑viral agents, vaccines or an effective combination therapy for 
treatment/management of SARS‑CoV‑2 infection and spread therapy will be 
developed and implemented in 2021, and we would like to extend our best regards 
to the frontline health workers across the world in their fight against 
COVID‑19.

DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.2020.4794
PMCID: PMC7723515
PMID: 33236131 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Epidemiol Infect. 2024 Oct 7;152:e120. doi: 10.1017/S0950268824001110.

Will COVID-19 become mild, like a cold?

Shaw Stewart PD(1).

Author information:
(1)Independent scientist.

Several recent studies conclude that an increase in the pathogenicity of 
SARS-CoV-2 cannot be ruled out. However, it should be noted that SARS-CoV-2 is a 
'direct' respiratory virus - meaning it is usually spread by the respiratory 
route but does not routinely pass through the lymphatics like measles and 
smallpox. Providing its tropism does not change, it will be unique if its 
pathogenicity does not decrease until it becomes similar to common cold viruses. 
Ewald noted in the 1980s that respiratory viruses may evolve mildness because 
their spread benefits from the mobility of their hosts. This review examines 
factors that usually lower respiratory viruses' severity, including heat 
sensitivity (which limits replication in the warmer lungs) and changes to the 
virus's surface proteins. Other factors may, however, increase pathogenicity, 
such as replication in the lymphatic system and spreading via solid surfaces or 
faecal matter. Furthermore, human activities and political events could increase 
the harmfulness of SARS-CoV-2, including the following: large-scale testing, 
especially when the results are delayed; transmission in settings where people 
are close together and not free to move around; poor hygiene facilities; and 
social, political, or cultural influences that encourage sick individuals to 
remain active, including crises such as wars. If we can avoid these 
eventualities, SARS-CoV-2 is likely to evolve to be milder, although the 
timescale is uncertain. Observations of influenza-like pandemics suggest it may 
take around two decades for COVID-19 to become as mild as seasonal colds.

DOI: 10.1017/S0950268824001110
PMCID: PMC11488471
PMID: 39370682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Viruses. 2021 Mar 5;13(3):413. doi: 10.3390/v13030413.

Pharmacogenetics Approach for the Improvement of COVID-19 Treatment.

Fricke-Galindo I(1), Falfán-Valencia R(1).

Author information:
(1)HLA Laboratory, Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Respiratorias Ismael Cosío 
Villegas, Mexico City 14080, Mexico.

The treatment of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has been a challenge. The 
efficacy of several drugs has been evaluated and variability in drug response 
has been observed. Pharmacogenetics could explain this variation and improve 
patients' outcomes with this complex disease; nevertheless, several 
disease-related issues must be carefully reviewed in the pharmacogenetic study 
of COVID-19 treatment. We aimed to describe the pharmacogenetic variants 
reported for drugs used for COVID-19 treatment (remdesivir, oseltamivir, 
lopinavir, ritonavir, azithromycin, chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine, ivermectin, 
and dexamethasone). In addition, other factors relevant to the design of 
pharmacogenetic studies were mentioned. Variants in CYP3A4, CYP3A5, CYP2C8, 
CY2D6, ABCB1, ABCC2, and SLCO1B1, among other variants, could be included in 
pharmacogenetic studies of COVID-19 treatment. Besides, nongenetic factors such 
as drug-drug interactions and inflammation should be considered in the search 
for personalized therapy of COVID-19.

DOI: 10.3390/v13030413
PMCID: PMC7998786
PMID: 33807592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


27. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2020 Nov 10;10:560616. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2020.560616. eCollection 2020.

An Update on Molecular Diagnostics for COVID-19.

Islam KU(1), Iqbal J(1).

Author information:
(1)Multidisciplinary Center for Advanced Research and Studies, Jamia Millia 
Islamia, New Delhi, India.

A novel strain of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) 
disease (COVID-19) has been recently identified as an infectious disease 
affecting the respiratory system of humans. This disease is caused by SARS-CoV-2 
that was identified in Chinese patients having severe pneumonia and flu-like 
symptoms. COVID-19 is a contagious disease that spreads rapidly via droplet 
particles arising through sneezing and coughing action of an infected person. 
The reports of asymptomatic carriers changed the scenario of symptom 
based-diagnosis in COVID-19 and intensified the need for proper diagnosis of the 
majority of the population to combat the rapid transmission of virus. The 
diagnosis of positive cases is necessary to ensure prompt care to affected 
people and also to curb further spread of infection in the population. 
Collecting samples at the right time and from the exact anatomical site is 
crucial for proper molecular diagnosis. After the complete genome sequence was 
available, China formulated RT-PCR as a primary diagnostic procedure for 
detecting SARS-CoV-2. Many in-house and commercial diagnostic kits have been 
developed or are under development that have a potential to lower the burden of 
diagnosis on the primary diagnostic techniques like RT-PCR. Serological based 
diagnosis is another broad category of testing that can detect different serum 
antibodies like IgG, IgM, and IgA in an infected patient. PCR-based diagnostic 
procedures that are commonly used for pathogen detection need sophisticated 
machines and assistance of a technical expert. Despite their reliable accuracy, 
they are not cost-effective tests, which a common man can afford, so it becomes 
imperative to look for other diagnostic approaches, which could be cost 
effective, rapid, and sensitive with consistent accuracy. To make such 
diagnostics available to the common man, many techniques can be exploited among, 
which are Point of Care (POC), also known as bed side testing, which is 
developing as a portable and promising tool in pathogen diagnosis. Other lateral 
flow assay (LFA)-based techniques like SHERLOCK, CRISPR-Cas12a (AIOD-CRISPR), 
and FNCAS9 editor-limited uniform detection assay (FELUDA), etc. have shown 
promising results in rapid detection of pathogens. Diagnosis holds a critical 
importance in the pandemic situation when there is no potential drug for the 
pathogen available in the market. This review sums up the different diagnostic 
approaches designed or proposed to combat the crisis of widespread diagnosis due 
to the sudden outbreak of a novel pathogen, SARS-CoV-2 in 2019.

Copyright © 2020 Islam and Iqbal.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2020.560616
PMCID: PMC7683783
PMID: 33244462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Molecules. 2021 Jun 9;26(12):3526. doi: 10.3390/molecules26123526.

A Multidisciplinary Approach to Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19).

Gediz Erturk A(1), Sahin A(2), Bati Ay E(3), Pelit E(4), Bagdatli E(1), Kulu 
I(5), Gul M(6), Mesci S(7), Eryilmaz S(8), Oba Ilter S(9), Yildirim T(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Ordu University, 
Altınordu, Ordu 52200, Turkey.
(2)Department of Basic Medical Sciences-Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Uşak 
University, 1-EylulUşak 64000, Turkey.
(3)Department of Plant and Animal Production, Suluova Vocational School, Amasya 
University, Suluova, Amasya 05100, Turkey.
(4)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Kırklareli University, 
Kırklareli 39000, Turkey.
(5)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Gebze Technical 
University, Kocaeli 41400, Turkey.
(6)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Amasya University, 
Ipekkoy, Amasya 05100, Turkey.
(7)Scientific Technical Application and Research Center, Hitit University, Çorum 
19030, Turkey.
(8)Department of Physics, Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Amasya University, 
Ipekkoy, Amasya 05100, Turkey.
(9)Food Processing Department, Suluova Vocational School, Amasya University, 
Suluova, Amasya 05100, Turkey.
(10)Department of Biology, Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Amasya University, 
Ipekkoy, Amasya 05100, Turkey.

Since December 2019, humanity has faced an important global threat. Many studies 
have been published on the origin, structure, and mechanism of action of the 
SARS-CoV-2 virus and the treatment of its disease. The priority of scientists 
all over the world has been to direct their time to research this subject. In 
this review, we highlight chemical studies and therapeutic approaches to 
overcome COVID-19 with seven different sections. These sections are the 
structure and mechanism of action of SARS-CoV-2, immunotherapy and vaccine, 
computer-aided drug design, repurposing therapeutics for COVID-19, synthesis of 
new molecular structures against COVID-19, food safety/security and functional 
food components, and potential natural products against COVID-19. In this work, 
we aimed to screen all the newly synthesized compounds, repurposing chemicals 
covering antiviral, anti-inflammatory, antibacterial, antiparasitic, anticancer, 
antipsychotic, and antihistamine compounds against COVID-19. We also highlight 
computer-aided approaches to develop an anti-COVID-19 molecule. We explain that 
some phytochemicals and dietary supplements have been identified as antiviral 
bioproducts, which have almost been successfully tested against COVID-19. In 
addition, we present immunotherapy types, targets, immunotherapy and 
inflammation/mutations of the virus, immune response, and vaccine issues.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26123526
PMCID: PMC8228528
PMID: 34207756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interests.


29. Trends Microbiol. 2021 Oct;29(10):919-929. doi: 10.1016/j.tim.2021.05.002. Epub 
2021 May 11.

Catch Me if You Can: Superspreading of COVID-19.

Lakdawala SS(1), Menachery VD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Center for Vaccine 
Research, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute for Human Infection and 
Immunity, World Reference Center for Emerging Viruses and Arboviruses, 
University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, Galveston, TX, USA. Electronic 
address: Vimenach@utmb.edu.

While significant insights have been gained concerning COVID-19, superspreading 
of coronaviruses remains a mystery. The vast majority of cases have been linked 
to a relatively small portion of infected individuals. Yet, the genetic sequence 
of the virus, severity of disease, and underlying host parameters, such as age, 
sex, and health conditions, are not clearly driving the superspreading 
phenomenon. In this commentary we discuss what is known and what is not known 
about coronavirus superspreader transmission and explore whether characteristics 
of the virion, the donor, or the environment contribute to this phenomenon.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tim.2021.05.002
PMCID: PMC8112283
PMID: 34059436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests There are no interests 
to declare.


30. Rheum Dis Clin North Am. 2025 Feb;51(1):139-156. doi: 10.1016/j.rdc.2024.09.003.

SARS-CoV-2 Infection and COVID-19 in Children.

Waghmare A(1), Hijano DR(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Fred Hutchinson Cancer 
Research Center Vaccine, 1100 Fairview Avenue North, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; 
Department of Infectious Diseases, Division Seattle Children's Hospital, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place Mail Stop 230, 
Memphis, TN 38105, USA. Electronic address: Diego.Hijano@STJUDE.ORG.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection is common 
in children, and clinical manifestations can vary depending on age, underlying 
disease, and vaccination status. Most children will have asymptomatic or mild 
infection, but certain baseline characteristics can increase the risk of 
moderate to severe disease. The following article will provide an overview of 
the clinical manifestations of coronavirus disease 2019 in children, including 
the post-infectious phenomenon called multisystem inflammatory syndrome in 
children. Currently available treatment and prophylaxis strategies will be 
outlined, with the caveat that new therapeutics and clinical efficacy data are 
constantly on the horizon.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rdc.2024.09.003
PMID: 39550102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Science. 2021 Dec 24;374(6575):1561-1562. doi: 10.1126/science.abl8487. Epub 
2021 Dec 23.

COVID-19 vaccine breakthrough infections.

Gupta RK(1)(2)(3), Topol EJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Disease 
(CITIID), Cambridge, UK.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Africa Health Research Institute, KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa.
(4)Scripps Research, La Jolla, Califonia, USA.

Vaccine efficacy wanes over time but can be fully restored with a booster dose.

DOI: 10.1126/science.abl8487
PMID: 34941414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Nat Rev Genet. 2021 Jul;22(7):415-426. doi: 10.1038/s41576-021-00360-w. Epub 
2021 May 4.

Testing at scale during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Mercer TR(1)(2)(3), Salit M(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, University of 
Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia. t.mercer@uq.edu.au.
(2)Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, NSW, Australia. 
t.mercer@uq.edu.au.
(3)St Vincent's Clinical School, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia. t.mercer@uq.edu.au.
(4)Departments of Pathology and Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, 
CA, USA.
(5)Joint Initiative for Metrology in Biology, SLAC National Accelerator 
Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA, USA.

Assembly and publication of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2) genome in January 2020 enabled the immediate development of tests 
to detect the new virus. This began the largest global testing programme in 
history, in which hundreds of millions of individuals have been tested to date. 
The unprecedented scale of testing has driven innovation in the strategies, 
technologies and concepts that govern testing in public health. This Review 
describes the changing role of testing during the COVID-19 pandemic, including 
the use of genomic surveillance to track SARS-CoV-2 transmission around the 
world, the use of contact tracing to contain disease outbreaks and testing for 
the presence of the virus circulating in the environment. Despite these efforts, 
widespread community transmission has become entrenched in many countries and 
has required the testing of populations to identify and isolate infected 
individuals, many of whom are asymptomatic. The diagnostic and epidemiological 
principles that underpin such population-scale testing are also considered, as 
are the high-throughput and point-of-care technologies that make testing 
feasible on a massive scale.

DOI: 10.1038/s41576-021-00360-w
PMCID: PMC8094986
PMID: 33948037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


33. Int J Nanomedicine. 2021 Jan 26;16:623-649. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S296383. 
eCollection 2021.

Application of Nanotechnology in the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Yang D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, Gachon University, Incheon, 
21999, South Korea.

COVID-19, caused by SARS-CoV-2 infection, has been prevalent worldwide for 
almost a year. In early 2000, there was an outbreak of SARS-CoV, and in early 
2010, a similar dissemination of infection by MERS-CoV occurred. However, no 
clear explanation for the spread of SARS-CoV-2 and a massive increase in the 
number of infections has yet been proposed. The best solution to overcome this 
pandemic is the development of suitable and effective vaccines and therapeutics. 
Fortunately, for SARS-CoV-2, the genome sequence and protein structure have been 
published in a short period, making research and development for prevention and 
treatment relatively easy. In addition, intranasal drug delivery has proven to 
be an effective method of administration for treating viral lung diseases. In 
recent years, nanotechnology-based drug delivery systems have been applied to 
intranasal drug delivery to overcome various limitations that occur during 
mucosal administration, and advances have been made to the stage where effective 
drug delivery is possible. This review describes the accumulated knowledge of 
the previous SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV infections and aims to help understand the 
newly emerged SARS-CoV-2 infection. Furthermore, it elucidates the achievements 
in developing COVID-19 vaccines and therapeutics to date through existing 
approaches. Finally, the applicable nanotechnology approach is described in 
detail, and vaccines and therapeutic drugs developed based on nanomedicine, 
which are currently undergoing clinical trials, have presented the potential to 
become innovative alternatives for overcoming COVID-19.

© 2021 Yang.

DOI: 10.2147/IJN.S296383
PMCID: PMC7847377
PMID: 33531805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that they have no conflicts 
of interest for this work.


34. Medwave. 2021 May 25;21(4):e8198. doi: 10.5867/medwave.2021.04.8198.

What we know and dont know on SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19.

[Article in English, Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Silva-Ayarza I(1), Bachelet VC(2).

Author information:
(1)Escuela de Medicina, Universidad de Santiago de Chile (USACH), Santiago, 
Chile; Departamento de Infectología, Hospital Barros Luco, Santiago, Chile. 
Adress: Escuela de Medicina, Universidad de Santiago de Chile, Avenida 
Libertador Bernardo O'Higgins 3363, Estación Central, Santiago, Chile. Email: 
ignacio.silva.a@usach.cl. ORCID: 0000-0002-6996-3695.
(2)Escuela de Medicina, Universidad de Santiago de Chile (USACH), Santiago, 
Chile. ORCID: 0000-0002-5715-9755.

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus discovered 
in December 2019 in Wuhan, China, has had an enormous impact on public health 
worldwide due to its rapid spread and pandemic behavior, challenges in its 
control and mitigation, and few therapeutic alternatives. In this review, we 
summarize the pathophysiological mechanisms, clinical presentation, and 
diagnostic techniques. In addition, the main lineages and the different 
strategies for disease prevention are reviewed, with emphasis on the development 
of vaccines and their different platforms. Finally, some of the currently 
available therapeutic strategies are summarized. Throughout the article, we 
point out the current knowns and unknowns at the time of writing this article.

Publisher: La enfermedad por coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19), causada por el virus 
SARS-CoV-2 descubierto en diciembre de 2019 en Wuhan, China, ha tenido un gran 
impacto en la salud pública a nivel mundial, por su rápida diseminación con 
comportamiento pandémico, su difícil control y escasas alternativas 
terapéuticas. En esta revisión, se resumen los mecanismos fisiopatológicos de la 
enfermedad, así como su presentación clínica y técnicas diagnósticas. Además, se 
revisan los linajes más importantes y las distintas estrategias de prevención de 
la enfermedad, con énfasis en el desarrollo de vacunas y sus diferentes 
plataformas. Por último, se resumen algunas de las estrategias terapéuticas 
disponibles en la actualidad.

DOI: 10.5867/medwave.2021.04.8198
PMID: 34213514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Immunoassay Immunochem. 2021 Sep 3;42(5):493-512. doi: 
10.1080/15321819.2021.1904414. Epub 2021 Mar 31.

An overview of Covid-19 pandemic: immunology and pharmacology.

Arif A(1), Ansari S(1), Ahsan H(2), Mahmood R(1), Khan FH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Life Sciences, Aligarh Muslim 
University, Aligarh India.
(2)Faculty of Dentistry, Department of Biochemistry, Jamia Millia Islamia, New 
Delhi India.

In this review, we present an elaborate account of coronavirus in context to 
Covid-19 focusing on its origin, genome, life cycle, and immunology with a basic 
understanding of the disease and its cause. Further, the transmission, 
prevention and advances in therapeutics have also been discussed anticipating 
the possible outcomes in the near future. Moreover, the recently emerged 
unconventional approaches to this viral disease like drug repurposing, plasma 
therapy, nasal spray, and other preventive measures worldwide are studied for a 
long-term impact and relevance. Hence, this account on coronavirus and the 
ongoing pandemic serves a purpose of spreading awareness and to pass on relevant 
knowledge for a better chance to combat such unfortunate health crisis in 
future.

DOI: 10.1080/15321819.2021.1904414
PMID: 33788668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Neurol Sci. 2021 Feb 15;421:117316. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2021.117316. Epub 2021 
Jan 10.

Cerebrospinal fluid in COVID-19: A systematic review of the literature.

Lewis A(1), Frontera J(2), Placantonakis DG(3), Lighter J(4), Galetta S(5), 
Balcer L(6), Melmed KR(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA; 
Department of Neurosurgery, NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA. 
Electronic address: Ariane.Kansas.Lewis@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Neurology, NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA; 
Department of Neurosurgery, NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, 
USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, 
USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA; 
Department of Ophthalmology, NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, 
USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA; 
Department of Ophthalmology, NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, 
USA; Department of Population Health, NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 
10016, USA.

Comment in
    Indian J Pediatr. 2023 Jan;90(1):101. doi: 10.1007/s12098-022-04404-9.

OBJECTIVE: We sought to review the literature on cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
testing in patients with COVID-19 for evidence of viral neuroinvasion by 
SARS-CoV-2.
METHODS: We performed a systematic review of Medline and Embase between December 
1, 2019 and November 18, 2020 to identify case reports or series of patients who 
had COVID-19 diagnosed based on positive SARS-CoV-2 polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) or serologic testing and had CSF testing due to a neurologic symptom.
RESULTS: We identified 242 relevant documents which included 430 patients with 
COVID-19 who had acute neurological symptoms prompting CSF testing. Of those, 
321 (75%) patients had symptoms that localized to the central nervous system 
(CNS). Of 304 patients whose CSF was tested for SARS-CoV-2 PCR, there were 17 
(6%) whose test was positive, all of whom had symptoms that localized to the 
central nervous system (CNS). The majority (13/17, 76%) of these patients were 
admitted to the hospital because of neurological symptoms. Of 58 patients whose 
CSF was tested for SARS-CoV-2 antibody, 7 (12%) had positive antibodies with 
evidence of intrathecal synthesis, all of whom had symptoms that localized to 
the CNS. Of 132 patients who had oligoclonal bands evaluated, 3 (2%) had 
evidence of intrathecal antibody synthesis. Of 77 patients tested for autoimmune 
antibodies in the CSF, 4 (5%) had positive findings.
CONCLUSION: Detection of SARS-CoV-2 in CSF via PCR or evaluation for intrathecal 
antibody synthesis appears to be rare. Most neurological complications 
associated with SARS- CoV-2 are unlikely to be related to direct viral 
neuroinvasion.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2021.117316
PMCID: PMC7833669
PMID: 33561753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.


37. Rheumatol Int. 2021 Aug;41(8):1375-1386. doi: 10.1007/s00296-021-04873-9. Epub 
2021 Apr 26.

Sex hormones, autoimmunity and gender disparity in COVID-19.

Raza HA(1), Sen P(2), Bhatti OA(1), Gupta L(3).

Author information:
(1)Medical College, Aga Khan University Hospital, Stadium Road, Karachi, 
Pakistan.
(2)Maulana Azad Medical College, 2-Bahadur Shah Zafar marg, New Delhi, India.
(3)Department of Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, Sanjay Gandhi 
Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow, 226014, India. 
drlatikagupta@gmail.com.

The Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has majorly contributed to 
massive and widespread mortality. Epidemiological data strongly indicates a 
sex-based disparity in COVID-19 clinical outcomes, with women having lower 
infection and hospitalisation rates, coupled with better prognosis and lesser 
mortality. This disparity may be explained by several mechanisms including 
differences in innate and adaptive immune responses, genetic factors, and an 
interplay between sex hormones and immune effectors, as well as gender-specific 
behaviour differences. These pathways, particularly the immunological divergence 
in response to viral infection, could potentially influence not only COVID-19 
pathogenesis and disease course, but also the response to antiviral drugs and 
vaccines. Furthermore, factors that confer a protective advantage against 
COVID-19 may be exploited to develop therapeutic strategies to improve clinical 
outcomes in COVID-19.

DOI: 10.1007/s00296-021-04873-9
PMCID: PMC8075025
PMID: 33903964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest.


38. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2020 Dec 1;16(12):2891-2904. doi: 
10.1080/21645515.2020.1788310. Epub 2020 Jul 23.

COVID-19 - Recent advancements in identifying novel vaccine candidates and 
current status of upcoming SARS-CoV-2 vaccines.

Iqbal Yatoo M(1), Hamid Z(2), Parray OR(1), Wani AH(1), Ul Haq A(1), Saxena 
A(3), Patel SK(4), Pathak M(4), Tiwari R(5), Malik YS(6), Sah R(7), Rabaan 
AA(8), Rodriguez Morales AJ(9)(10), Dhama K(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Veterinary Clinical Complex, Faculty of Veterinary Sciences and 
Animal Husbandry, Sher-E-Kashmir University of Agricultural Sciences and 
Technology of Kashmir , Srinagar, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, University of Kashmir , Srinagar, India.
(3)Division of Biotechnology, ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research Institute , 
Bareilly, India.
(4)Division of Pathology, ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research Institute , Bareilly, 
India.
(5)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Immunology, College of Veterinary 
Sciences, UP Pandit Deen Dayal Upadhayay Pashu Chikitsa Vigyan Vishwavidyalay 
Evum Go-Anusandhan Sansthan , Mathura, India.
(6)Division of Biological Standardization, ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research 
Institute , Bareilly, India.
(7)Department of Microbiology, Tribhuvan University Teaching Hospital, Institute 
of Medicine , Kathmandu, Nepal.
(8)Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, Johns Hopkins Aramco Healthcare , Dhahran, 
Saudi Arabia.
(9)Public Health and Infection Research Group, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
Universidad Tecnologica de Pereira , Pereira, Colombia.
(10)Grupo de Investigacion Biomedicina, Faculty of Medicine, Fundacion 
Universitaria Autonoma de las Americas , Risaralda, Colombia.

The COVID-19 pandemic caused by SARS-CoV-2 has spread rapidly. To date, 
countries have relied on the prevention of the disease through isolation, 
quarantine, and clinical care of affected individuals. However, studies on the 
roles of asymptomatic and mildly infected subjects in disease transmission, use 
of antiviral drugs, and vaccination of the general population will be very 
important for mitigating the effects of the eventual return of this pandemic. 
Initial investigations are ongoing to evaluate antigenic structures of 
SARS-CoV-2 and the immunogenicity of vaccine candidates. There also is a need to 
comprehensively compile the details of previous studies on SARS-related vaccines 
that can be extrapolated to identify potent vaccine targets for developing 
COVID-19 vaccines. This review aims to analyze previous studies, current status, 
and future possibilities for producing SARS-CoV-2 vaccines.

DOI: 10.1080/21645515.2020.1788310
PMCID: PMC8641591
PMID: 32703064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 2021 Apr-Jun;64(2):229-230. doi: 
10.4103/ijpm.ijpm_177_21.

Post-COVID era: Time to ponder.

Agrawal R(1).

Author information:
(1)MD; FIC Path; MIAC, DHA, Professor, Department of Pathology, Rohilkhand 
Medical College and Hospital, Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh, India.

DOI: 10.4103/ijpm.ijpm_177_21
PMID: 33851612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. FEBS J. 2021 Sep;288(17):4992-4995. doi: 10.1111/febs.16167.

Spotlight on COVID-19: eighteen months on.

Zacchigna S(1), Marcello A(2), Banks L(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cardiovascular Biology, The International Centre for Genetic 
Engineering and Biotechnology, Trieste, Italy.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Virology, The International Centre for Genetic 
Engineering and Biotechnology, Trieste, Italy.
(3)Laboratory of Tumour Virology, The International Centre for Genetic 
Engineering and Biotechnology, Trieste, Italy.

In this Editorial, we highlight the contents of The FEBS Journal's second 
Special Issue focussed on COVID-19. The issue covers a variety of aspects 
related to COVID-19, ranging from the most recent improvements in therapies and 
the significant impact of rapidly developed COVID-19 vaccines to the emergence 
of variants of SARS-CoV-2, the role of the immune system in the various stages 
of the disease and the impact of the disease in different organs. We hope that 
this collection of articles will give readers an informative and critical 
perspective on recent advances in understanding and treating COVID-19.

© 2021 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.16167
PMCID: PMC8646732
PMID: 34490732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Dermatol Ther. 2020 Sep;33(5):e13525. doi: 10.1111/dth.13525. Epub 2020 May 22.

Comprehensive overview of COVID-19 based on current evidence.

Kang Y(1), Xu S(2).

Author information:
(1)China Pharmaceutical University & Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Oncogenesis and 
Intervention, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Jiangsu Cancer Hospital & Jiangsu Institute of Cancer Research & The 
Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, 
China.

In December 2019, twenty-seven pneumonia patients with unknown causes originated 
in South China seafood market in Wuhan. The virus infection spread rapidly and 
swept through China in less than a month. Subsequently, the virus was proven a 
novel coronavirus and named SARS-CoV-2. The outbreak of novel coronavirus has 
been determined as a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC) by 
WHO on January 31, 2020. Similar to other coronaviruses like the Middle East 
Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) CoV and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) 
CoV, the novel coronavirus was reported to spread via respiratory droplets and 
close contact from human to human, which means the virus is highly infectious 
and dangerous. Unfortunately, till now the virus has spread to over 200 
countries/territories/areas around the world and the Coronavirus Disease 2019 
(COVID-19) outbreak is continuing to grow. Currently, information sharing and 
transparency are essential for risk assessment and epidemic control in all 
endemic areas. In this article, we compared SARS-CoV-2 with SARS-CoV and 
influenza virus, discussed current researching progress of COVID-19, including 
clinical characteristics, pathological changes, treatment measures, and so on.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/dth.13525
PMCID: PMC7267400
PMID: 32378801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors disclose no conflict of interest.


42. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2021 May 1;27(3):155-162. doi: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000768.

COVID-19 new diagnostics development: novel detection methods for SARS-CoV-2 
infection and considerations for their translation to routine use.

Huggett JF(1)(2), Moran-Gilad J(3), Lee JE(4).

Author information:
(1)National Measurement Laboratory (NML) at LGC, Queens Rd, Teddington.
(2)School of Biosciences & Medicine, Faculty of Health & Medical Science, 
University of Surrey, Guildford, UK.
(3)Department of Health Systems Management, School of Public Health, Faculty of 
Health Sciences, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.
(4)Division of Policy and Strategy, Korea Research Institute of Standards and 
Science, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: COVID-19 has put the in-vitro-diagnostic community under an 
unprecedented spotlight, with a global requirement for accurate SARS-CoV-2 
tests. This review will outline technological responses to this need and the 
analytical considerations required for their translation to routine use.
RECENT FINDINGS: SARS-CoV-2 diagnostic solutions directly detect the virus or 
measure host-derived surrogate markers of infection. With pressure upon supply 
chains for the 'traditional' molecular approaches, a wide variety of analytical 
tools spanning the molecular, serology, imaging and chemistry space are being 
developed, including high throughput solutions and simplified near-patient 
formats.
SUMMARY: The unique genetic nature of SARS-CoV-2 means high analytical 
specificity is achievable by most diagnostic formats. However, clinical 
sensitivity assessment is complicated by wide discrepancies in analytical range 
and challenges associated with standardising these differences. When coupled 
with the acute nature of SARS-CoV-2 infection, reported precise metrics of test 
performance must be questioned. The response to SARS-CoV-2 has delivered 
considerable diagnostic innovation, but for a technology to be maximised, it 
must be demonstrably reproducible and fit for purpose. If novel diagnostic 
solutions for SARS-CoV-2 are to succeed, equally innovative mechanisms are 
needed to ensure widespread clinical and surveillance application, enabling 
agreed standards and metrics to ensure comparability.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000768
PMID: 33654014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Front Biosci (Elite Ed). 2021 Dec 20;13(2):272-290. doi: 10.52586/E884.

COVID-19: morphology and mechanism of the SARS-CoV-2, global outbreak, 
medication, vaccines and future of the virus.

Bhattacharyya P(1), Das S(1), Aich S(2), Sarkar J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany, Dinabandhu Andrews College, Garia, Kolkata, 700084 West 
Bengal, India.
(2)Department of Botany, Vivekananda College, Thakurpukur, Kolkata, 700063 West 
Bengal, India.

Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) is a lethal virus 
that was detected back on 31st December 2019 in Wuhan, Hubei province in China, 
and since then this virus has been spreading across the globe causing a global 
outbreak and has left the world fighting against the virus. The disease caused 
by the SARS-CoV-2 was named COVID-19 and this was declared a pandemic disease by 
the World Health Organization on 11th March 2020. Several nations are trying to 
develop a vaccine that can save millions of lives. This review outlines the 
morphological features of the virus describing the outer and inner structures of 
the virus along with the entry mechanism of the virus into the host body and the 
infection process. Detailed reports of global outbreak along with preventive 
measures have also been included, with special emphasis on China, the United 
States of America, India, Italy, and South Korea. Broad-spectrum antiviral drugs 
being used at various health care centres around the world, namely Remdesivir, 
Camostat & Nafamostat, Famotidine, Chloroquine & Hydroxychloroquine, 
Lopinavir/ritonavir, Ivermectin, and Tocilizumab & Sarilumab have also been 
included. World Health Organization guidelines on preventive measures and use of 
soaps, alcohol-based hand-rubs and wearing face masks have also been described. 
The vaccines that are in one of the phases of human trials, namely Oxford 
University's vaccine, the United States-based Moderna's vaccine, India's Covaxin 
and the Russian vaccine, have also been incorporated in the review article.

© 2021 The Author(s). Published by BRI.

DOI: 10.52586/E884
PMID: 34937314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Acta Med Indones. 2021 Jan;53(1):96-104.

Impact of COVID-19 on the Gut: A Review of the Manifestations, Pathology, 
Management, and Challenges.

Suryana KD(1), Simadibrata M, Renaldi K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Indonesia/ 
Dr. Cipto Mangunkusumo General Hospital National Hospital, Jakarta. 
kresna_suryana@yahoo.com.

SARS-CoV-2 is a virus that can enter its hosts through the Angiotensin 
Converting Enzyme-2 (ACE2) receptor. ACE2 is mainly expressed in cells of the 
gastrointestinal tract, such as the esophageal epithelium and enterocytes from 
the ileum-colon. Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) has varying clinical 
symptoms and presents differently in individuals, ranging from asymptomatic 
carriers to moderate clinical spectrum with mild pneumonia clinical features, 
and to a severe clinical presentation with dyspnea and hypoxia, leading to death 
due to respiratory or multi-organ failure. COVID-19 infection can also manifest 
themselves in the form of gastrointestinal symptoms such as diarrhea, vomiting, 
nausea, and abdominal pain. Severe complications of gastrointestinal COVID-19 
infections include hemorrhage or perforation of the gastrointestinal tract and 
severe inflammation, which can adversely affect the intestinal immune system, 
and therefore the systemic immune system of the host. Furthermore, COVID-19 has 
also shown to affect microbiota homeostasis in the digestive tract. To date, no 
clear explanation is available regarding the pathophysiology of gastrointestinal 
SARS-CoV-2 infection, fecal RNA detection, and the possibility of fecal-oral 
transmission of SARS-CoV-2. This review aims to discuss the effects of 
SARS-CoV-2 infection on the digestive tract, microbiota, and lung, and the 
possibility of fecal-oral transmission in COVID-19.

PMID: 33818412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Immunoassay Immunochem. 2021 Jul 4;42(4):335-346. doi: 
10.1080/15321819.2021.1895214. Epub 2021 Mar 9.

Road toward universal COVID-19 testing method - A review.

Abdul Bari AB(1), Samuel PJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Physiology, Chettinad Hospital and Research Institute, Chengalpattu, India.
(2)Physiology, Vels Medical College, Thiruvallur, India.

Patients infected with novel coronavirus exhibit a wide range of symptoms from 
common cold to pneumonia. Furthermore, several cases have been reported as 
asymptomatic across the globe. Since there are no conclusive clinical 
manifestations, clinicians have to rely more on laboratory diagnostic methods 
for confirmation of coronavirus disease. Hematological and biochemical tests are 
found to be of more prognostic value. Genetic assays by means of rRT-PCR 
technique is time-consuming but seems to be a more sensitive and specific test 
among the available testing methods for diagnosis of the coronavirus disease. 
Radiological imaging of the CT chest of the confirmed positive patients taken 
during the initial few days doesn't show any significant changes. However, from 
the second week onward a ground glass lesion pattern is observed. The 
immunological tests which are being used as a rapid testing method are found to 
be more false test negative. Hence, based on the effectiveness of various 
testing methods, it can be concluded that either rRT-PCR or mass antibody 
testing has to be done, and it has to be compared with CT chest in order to 
avoid false negatives across the globe which may help in the prevention of 
community spread of the disease.

DOI: 10.1080/15321819.2021.1895214
PMID: 33689569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Nat Commun. 2021 Jan 7;12(1):356. doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-20742-8.

Optimal COVID-19 quarantine and testing strategies.

Wells CR(1), Townsend JP(2)(3)(4)(5), Pandey A(1), Moghadas SM(6), Krieger 
G(7)(8), Singer B(9), McDonald RH(10), Fitzpatrick MC(1)(11), Galvani AP(1)(12).

Author information:
(1)Center for Infectious Disease Modeling and Analysis (CIDMA), Yale School of 
Public Health, New Haven, CT, 06520, USA.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, CT, 
06510, USA. Jeffrey.Townsend@Yale.edu.
(3)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, 
CT, 06525, USA. Jeffrey.Townsend@Yale.edu.
(4)Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT, 06511, USA. Jeffrey.Townsend@Yale.edu.
(5)Program in Microbiology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, 06511, USA. 
Jeffrey.Townsend@Yale.edu.
(6)Agent-Based Modelling Laboratory, York University, Toronto, ON, M3J 1P3, 
Canada.
(7)NewFields E&E, Boulder, CO, 80301, USA.
(8)Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Science, University of Colorado 
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, 80045, USA.
(9)Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of Florida, P.O. Box 100009, 
Gainesville, FL, 32610, USA.
(10)Group Health, Safety and Environment; BHP, Melbourne, VIC, 3000, Australia.
(11)Center for Vaccine Development and Global Health, University of Maryland 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MA, 21201, US.
(12)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, 
CT, 06525, USA.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2020 Nov 30:2020.10.27.20211631. doi: 10.1101/2020.10.27.20211631.

For COVID-19, it is vital to understand if quarantines shorter than 14 days can 
be equally effective with judiciously deployed testing. Here, we develop a 
mathematical model that quantifies the probability of post-quarantine 
transmission incorporating testing into travel quarantine, quarantine of traced 
contacts with an unknown time of infection, and quarantine of cases with a known 
time of exposure. We find that testing on exit (or entry and exit) can reduce 
the duration of a 14-day quarantine by 50%, while testing on entry shortens 
quarantine by at most one day. In a real-world test of our theory applied to 
offshore oil rig employees, 47 positives were obtained with testing on entry and 
exit to quarantine, of which 16 had tested negative at entry; preventing an 
expected nine offshore transmission events that each could have led to 
outbreaks. We show that appropriately timed testing can make shorter quarantines 
effective.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-020-20742-8
PMCID: PMC7788536
PMID: 33414470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J.P.T., S.M.M., G.K., B.S., R.M., and A.P.G. 
declare the following competing interests: received funding from the oil and gas 
company who collected the data. C.R.W., A.P., and M.C.F. declare no competing 
interest.


47. Viruses. 2021 Jun 29;13(7):1269. doi: 10.3390/v13071269.

COVID-19 Pandemic: Influence of Schools, Age Groups, and Virus Variants in 
Italy.

Sebastiani G(1)(2)(3), Palù G(4).

Author information:
(1)Istituto per le Applicazioni del Calcolo Mauro Picone, Consiglio Nazionale 
delle Ricerche, Via dei Taurini 19, 00185 Rome, Italy.
(2)Mathematics Department "Guido Castelnuovo", Sapienza University of Rome, 
Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Tromsø, H. Hansens 
veg 18, 9019 Tromsø, Norway.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Padova, 35121 Padova, Italy.

The estimated smooth curve of the percentage of subjects positive to SARS-CoV-2 
started decreasing in Italy at the beginning of January 2021, due to the 
government containment measures undertaken from Christmas until 7 January. 
Approximately two weeks after releasing the measures, the curve stopped to 
decrease and remained approximately constant for four weeks to increase again in 
the middle of February. This epidemic phase had a public health care impact 
since, from the beginning of the fourth week of February, the curve of the 
intensive care unit's occupancy started to grow. This wave of infection was 
characterized by the presence of new virus variants, with a higher than 80% 
dominance of the so-called "English" variant, since 15 April. School activities 
in Italy started at different times from 7 January until 8 February, depending 
on every region's decision. Our present data on the incidence of SARS-CoV-2 in 
different age groups in Italy are in agreement with literature reports showing 
that subjects older than 10 years are involved in virus transmission. More 
importantly, we provide evidence to support the hypothesis that also individuals 
of age 0-9 years can significantly contribute to the spread of SARS-CoV-2.

DOI: 10.3390/v13071269
PMCID: PMC8428146
PMID: 34209828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


48. Biomed Environ Sci. 2021 Jan 20;34(1):50-60. doi: 10.3967/bes2021.007.

The Pathogenesis and Treatment of COVID-19: A System Review.

Ji YL(1), Wu Y(1), Qiu Z(1), Ming H(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhang AN(1), Leng Y(1), Xia 
ZY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan 
430060, Hubei, China.

DOI: 10.3967/bes2021.007
PMCID: PMC7870101
PMID: 33531107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Int Immunopharmacol. 2021 Jun;95:107543. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2021.107543. Epub 
2021 Feb 27.

Covid-19 challenges to immune investigations and therapies.

Talmadge JE(1), Marceau F(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical 
Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA; Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA. Electronic address: 
jtalmadg@unmc.edu.
(2)Centre de Recherche du CHU de Québec-Université Laval, Québec, QC G1V 4G2, 
Canada. Electronic address: francois.marceau@crchudequebec.ulaval.ca.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2021.107543
PMCID: PMC7914004
PMID: 33735717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Trends Microbiol. 2021 Dec;29(12):1049-1051. doi: 10.1016/j.tim.2021.09.009. 
Epub 2021 Oct 25.

Apart, together: reflections on the COVID-19 pandemic.

Iyer S(1).

Author information:
(1)Editor, Trends in Microbiology. Electronic address: tim@cell.com.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tim.2021.09.009
PMCID: PMC8545609
PMID: 34752742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Nature. 2022 Jul;607(7917):18-19. doi: 10.1038/d41586-022-01771-3.

Fast-evolving COVID variants complicate vaccine updates.

Callaway E.

DOI: 10.1038/d41586-022-01771-3
PMID: 35760853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Sci Rep. 2021 May 19;11(1):10599. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-89513-9.

Effect of COVID-19 on liver abnormalities: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis.

Bzeizi K(1), Abdulla M(2), Mohammed N(2), Alqamish J(3), Jamshidi N(4), Broering 
D(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Liver & Small Bowel Transplantation & Hepatobiliary-Pancreatic 
Surgery, King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Center, P.O. Box 3354, 
Riyadh, 11211, Saudi Arabia. kbzeizi@kfshrc.edu.sa.
(2)Internal Medicine Department, Salmaniya Medical Complex, Manama, Bahrain.
(3)Ibn AlNafees Hospital, Manama, Bahrain.
(4)School of Science, RMIT University, Melbourne, VIC, 3000, Australia.
(5)Organ Transplant Center & Department of Surgery, King Faisal Specialist 
Hospital & Research Centre (Gen. Org) MBC 96, AlFaisal University, P.O. Box 
3354, Riyadh, 11211, Saudi Arabia.

Emerging evidence suggest association of severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection with the development of many liver 
abnormalities. The overarching aim of this study was therefore to assess the 
available evidence on the clinical effects of SARS-CoV-2 on the profiles of 
liver chemistries and coagulation in COVID-19 diagnosed patients. We considered 
all study designs including epidemiological and observational that reported 
liver function test abnormalities in patients confirmed with SARS-CoV-2 
infection. Medline, Embase databases and Google Scholar as well as relevant 
reviews were searched to identify appropriate studies from inception to 31st of 
August 2020. We calculated the pooled mean with 95% confidence intervals (95% 
CI) through a random-effect model meta-analysis. A total of 35 studies with 
10,692 participants were considered for the review from which 23 studies with 
sufficient quantitative data were included in the meta-analysis. The pooled mean 
for liver enzymes and coagulation parameters did not significantly change in 
patients diagnosed with COVID-19 and remained within normal range. 
Notwithstanding potential bias from confounding factors in interpretation of 
data in this review, findings from the observational studies and case reports 
suggest that COVID-19 does not appear to have a significant impact on the 
transaminases or total bilirubin levels of patients with confirmed SARS-CoV-2 
infection. Further controlled studies and larger sample size observational 
studies are needed with adequate reporting of other liver function parameters 
are warranted.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-89513-9
PMCID: PMC8134580
PMID: 34012016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


53. Chem Biol Interact. 2020 Dec 1;332:109298. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2020.109298. Epub 
2020 Oct 27.

Race to arsenal COVID-19 therapeutics: Current alarming status and future 
directions.

Dubey AK(1), Singh A(2), Prakash S(3), Kumar M(4), Singh AK(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Tamil 
Nadu, 600036, India.
(2)CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow, 226014, India.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, Sardar Patel College of Pharmacy, Gorakhpur, 273013, 
India.
(4)Department of Microbiology, SGPGIMS, Lucknow, 226014, India.
(5)Pennsylvania State University, Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey, PA, 
17033, USA. Electronic address: indianashoksingh@gmail.com.

The on-going pandemic of COVID-19 wreaked by a viral infection of SARS-CoV-2, 
has generated a catastrophic plight across the globe. Interestingly, one of the 
hallmarks of COVID-19 is the so-called 'cytokine storm' due to attack of 
SARS-Cov-2 in the lungs. Considering, mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) therapy 
could contribute against SARS-CoV-2 viruses attack because of their immune 
modulatory and anti-inflammatory ability linked to their stemness, to the 
arsenal of treatments for COVID-19. Another novel therapeutic strategies include 
the blockade of rampant generation of pro-inflammatory mediators like acute 
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), degradation of viral protein capsids by 
PROTACs, composed of Ubiquitin-proteasome framework, and 
ubiquitination-independent pathway directing the SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein 
(nCoV N) and proteasome activator (PA28γ), etc. This review is consequently an 
endeavour to highlight the several aspects of COVID-19 with incorporation of 
important treatment strategies discovered to date and putting the real effort on 
the future directions to put them into the perspective.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cbi.2020.109298
PMCID: PMC7588316
PMID: 33121920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.


54. BMJ. 2021 Dec 6;375:n3028. doi: 10.1136/bmj.n3028.

Covid-19: What we have learnt from behavioural science during the pandemic so 
far that can help prepare us for the future.

Williams S(1), Drury J(2), Michie S(3), Stokoe E(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Swansea University.
(2)School of Psychology, University of Sussex.
(3)University College London.
(4)Loughborough University.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj.n3028
PMID: 34872923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: SM and JD participate in 
the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Behavioural Science (SPI-B) and are 
members of Independent SAGE. ES participates in the Policing and Security 
subgroup of SPI-B (SAGE) and is a member of the Behavioural Advisory Group of 
Independent SAGE.


55. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2021 Jan;413(1):35-48. doi: 10.1007/s00216-020-02889-x. Epub 
2020 Sep 18.

Review of analytical performance of COVID-19 detection methods.

Giri B(1), Pandey S(1), Shrestha R(1), Pokharel K(1), Ligler FS(2), Neupane 
BB(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Analytical Sciences, Kathmandu Institute of Applied Sciences, 
Kathmandu, 44600, Nepal.
(2)Joint Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill and North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, 27695, USA. 
fsligler@ncsu.edu.
(3)Central Department of Chemistry, Tribhuvan University, Kathmandu, 44618, 
Nepal.

In the recent SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, public health experts have emphasized 
testing, tracking infected people, and tracing their contacts as an effective 
strategy to reduce the spread of the virus. Several diagnostic methods are 
reported for detecting the coronavirus in clinical, research, and public health 
laboratories. Some tests detect the infection directly by detecting the viral 
RNA and other tests detect the infection indirectly by detecting the host 
antibodies. A diagnostic test during the pandemic should help make an 
appropriate clinical decision in a short period of time. Recently reported 
diagnostic methods for SARS-CoV-2 have varying throughput, batching capacity, 
requirement of infrastructure setting, analytical performance, and turnaround 
times ranging from a few minutes to several hours. These factors should be 
considered while selecting a reliable and rapid diagnostic method to help make 
an appropriate decision and prompt public health interventions. This paper 
reviews recent SARS-CoV-2 diagnostic methods published in journals and reports 
released by regulatory agencies. We compared the analytical efficiency including 
limit of detection, sensitivity, specificity, and throughput. In addition, we 
also looked into ease of use, affordability, and availability of accessories. 
Finally, we discuss the limitations of the methods and provide our perspectives 
on priorities for future test development.

DOI: 10.1007/s00216-020-02889-x
PMCID: PMC7498299
PMID: 32944809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.


56. Int J Infect Dis. 2021 Jan;102:566-570. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2020.10.100. Epub 
2020 Nov 4.

Arginine depletion as a therapeutic approach for patients with COVID-19.

Grimes JM(1), Khan S(1), Badeaux M(2), Rao RM(2), Rowlinson SW(2), Carvajal 
RD(3).

Author information:
(1)Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Aeglea Biotherapeutics Inc., Austin, TX, USA.
(3)Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA; Herbert Irving 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA. Electronic address: 
rdc2150@cumc.columbia.edu.

The COVID-19 pandemic, caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2), is a source of significant morbidity and death worldwide, and 
effective treatments are urgently needed. Clinical trials have focused largely 
on direct antiviral therapies or on immunomodulation in patients with severe 
manifestations of COVID-19. One therapeutic approach that remains to be 
clinically investigated is disruption of the host-virus relationship through 
amino acid restriction, a strategy used successfully in the setting of cancer 
treatment. Arginine is an amino acid that has been shown in nonclinical studies 
to be essential in the life cycle of many viruses. Therefore, arginine depletion 
may be an effective therapeutic approach against SARS-CoV-2. Several 
arginine-metabolizing enzymes in clinical development may be a viable approach 
to induce a low arginine environment to treat COVID-19 and other viral diseases. 
Herein, we explore the rationale for arginine depletion as a therapeutic 
approach for COVID-19.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2020.10.100
PMCID: PMC7641537
PMID: 33160064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Asian Pac J Allergy Immunol. 2021 Jun;39(2):69-77. doi: 10.12932/AP-130121-1037.

Innate immunity in COVID-19: Drivers of pathogenesis and potential therapeutic 
targets.

Ruenjaiman V(1)(2), Hirankarn N(1)(2), Palaga T(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, 
Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Center of Excellence in Immunology and Immune-Mediated Diseases, 
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, 
Bangkok, Thailand.

A novel severe acute respiratory syndrome COVID-19 caused by coronavirus 
SARS-CoV-2 has been confirmed to infect more than 100 million people globally, 
with mortality reaching nearly 3 million as of March 2021. The symptoms vary 
widely, from the absence of any symptoms to death. The severity of COVID-19 
relates to hyperinflammatory conditions with acute respiratory distress syndrome 
(ARDS), which leads to multiple-organ failure and death. Innate immunity plays 
an important role in the early response to SARS-CoV-2 infection and regulates 
the pathogenesis and its clinical outcomes. The most severe cases of COVID-19 
present with increased innate immune cell infiltration in the lung, and elevated 
pro-inflammatory cytokines in the blood serum that are associated with disease 
severity. Here we review the innate immune response to SARS-CoV-2 infection 
based on the recent reports and discuss the potential roles of innate immune 
cells and their mediators in pathogenesis that dictate the outcome of the 
disease. Understanding the roles of innate immune responses at the initial 
stages of infection may provide early windows into treatment and clues for 
vaccine development.

DOI: 10.12932/AP-130121-1037
PMID: 34174806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Med Sci Monit. 2021 Apr 9;27:e930278. doi: 10.12659/MSM.930278.

A Review of the Current Status of Clinical Management of COVID-19 in the 
Elderly.

Li Q(1), Zhao C(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School, Qinghai University, Xining, Qinghai, China (mainland).
(2)Department of Geriatrics, Affiliated Hospital of Qinghai University, Xining, 
Qinghai, China (mainland).

The high infectivity and severity of SARS-CoV-2 infection (COVID-19), and our 
limited understanding of the biology of the novel coronavirus, as well as the 
lack of an effective treatment for COVID-19, have created a global pandemic. 
Those most likely to become seriously ill with COVID-19 are adults, especially 
the elderly and those who are already weak or sick. At present, a specific drug 
for treatment of COVID-19 has not been developed. This, combined with the 
typical coexistence of a variety of chronic diseases in elderly patients, makes 
treatment challenging at present. In addition, for elderly patients, COVID-19 
isolation measures during the epidemic can easily lead to psychological 
problems. Thus, how to manage elderly patients has become a focus of social 
attention in the current circumstances. This article reviews the effects of 
COVID-19 and makes management suggestions for elderly patients during this 
epidemic period. In addition to the elderly, critically ill people are also 
highly susceptible to this novel coronavirus. For elderly COVID-19 patients, 
antiviral therapy, immune regulation, and even auxiliary respiratory therapy can 
be given after a comprehensive evaluation of the disease. With the approval and 
use of COVID-19 vaccines, it is reasonable to expect that we can conquer 
SARS-CoV-2.

DOI: 10.12659/MSM.930278
PMCID: PMC8043417
PMID: 33833211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None.


59. Trends Microbiol. 2021 Oct;29(10):894-907. doi: 10.1016/j.tim.2021.03.004. Epub 
2021 Mar 14.

Therapeutic Potential of Metformin in COVID-19: Reasoning for Its Protective 
Role.

Samuel SM(1), Varghese E(2), Büsselberg D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medicine-Qatar, 
Education City, Qatar Foundation, 24144, Doha, Qatar. Electronic address: 
sms2016@qatar-med.cornell.edu.
(2)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medicine-Qatar, 
Education City, Qatar Foundation, 24144, Doha, Qatar.
(3)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medicine-Qatar, 
Education City, Qatar Foundation, 24144, Doha, Qatar. Electronic address: 
dib2015@qatar-med.cornell.edu.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infections present 
with increased disease severity and poor clinical outcomes in diabetic patients 
compared with their nondiabetic counterparts. Diabetes/hyperglycemia-triggered 
endothelial dysfunction and hyperactive inflammatory and immune responses are 
correlated to twofold to threefold higher intensive care hospitalizations and 
more than twice the mortality among diabetic coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) 
patients. While comorbidities such as obesity, cardiovascular disease, and 
hypertension worsen the prognosis of diabetic COVID-19 patients, COVID-19 
infections are also associated with new-onset diabetes, severe metabolic 
complications, and increased thrombotic events in the backdrop of aberrant 
endothelial function. While several antidiabetic medications are used to manage 
blood glucose levels, we discuss the multifaceted ability of metformin to 
control blood glucose levels and possibly attenuate endothelial dysfunction, 
inhibit viral entry and infection, and modify inflammatory and immune responses 
during SARS-CoV-2 infections. These actions make metformin a viable candidate 
drug to be considered for repurposing and gaining ground against the 
SARS-CoV-2-induced tsunami in diabetic COVID-19 patients.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tim.2021.03.004
PMCID: PMC7955932
PMID: 33785249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no 
conflict of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the 
collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the 
manuscript; or in the decision to publish the article.


60. Aging (Albany NY). 2021 Feb 14;13(3):4713-4730. doi: 10.18632/aging.202665. Epub 
2021 Feb 14.

Neurological involvement in the respiratory manifestations of COVID-19 patients.

Tan BH(1), Liu JM(2), Gui Y(2), Wu S(2), Suo JL(2), Li YC(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory Teaching Center of Basic Medicine, Norman Bethune Health Science 
Center of Jilin University, Jilin, China.
(2)Department of Histology and Embryology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, 
Norman Bethune College of Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin, China.

The peculiar features of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by Severe 
Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2), are challenging the 
current biological knowledge. Early in Feb, 2020, we suggested that SARS-CoV-2 
may possess neuroinvasive potential similar to that of many other coronaviruses. 
Since then, a variety of neurological manifestations have been associated with 
SARS-CoV-2 infection, which was supported in some patients with neuroimaging 
and/or cerebrospinal fluid tests. To date, at least 27 autopsy studies on the 
brains of COVID-19 patients can be retrieved through PubMed/MEDLINE, among which 
neuropathological alterations were observed in the brainstem in 78 of 134 
examined patients, and SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid and viral proteins were detected 
in the brainstem in 16/49 (32.7%) and 18/71 (25.3%) cases, respectively. To shed 
some light on the peculiar respiratory manifestations of COVID-19 patients, this 
review assessed the existing evidence about the neurogenic mechanism underlying 
the respiratory failure induced by SARS-CoV-2 infection. Acknowledging the 
neurological involvement has important guiding significance for the prevention, 
treatment, and prognosis of SARS-CoV-2 infection.

DOI: 10.18632/aging.202665
PMCID: PMC7906194
PMID: 33582654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: The authors declared no 
conflicts of interest.


61. N Engl J Med. 2022 Jan 6;386(1):e9. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe2200149.

Audio Interview: Covid-19 - The Outlook in Europe.

Rubin EJ, Baden LR, Drosten C, Morrissey S.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMe2200149
PMID: 34986293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. BMC Infect Dis. 2024 Nov 14;24(1):1306. doi: 10.1186/s12879-024-10094-9.

Identifying COVID-19 variant through symptoms profile: Would it be possible? A 
rapid review.

Guarienti FA(1)(2), Xavier FAC(3)(4), Ferraz MD(1)(5), Bartelle MB(1)(6), Pasa 
R(1)(6), Angonese A(1)(6), Zanirati GG(1), Marinowic DR(1)(2)(7), Machado 
DC(1)(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Brain Institute of Rio Grande do Sul (InsCer), Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(2)Post Graduation Program in Geriatrics and Gerontology, Pontifical Catholic 
University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(3)Brain Institute of Rio Grande do Sul (InsCer), Porto Alegre, Brazil. 
fxavier@pucrs.br.
(4)Post Graduation Program in Medicine and Health Sciences, Pontifical Catholic 
University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil. fxavier@pucrs.br.
(5)Graduate Program in Pharmacy, Pontifical Catholic University of Rio Grande do 
Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(6)Graduate Program in Medicine, Pontifical Catholic University of Rio Grande do 
Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(7)Post Graduation Program in Medicine and Health Sciences, Pontifical Catholic 
University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.

The first outbreaks of coronavirus CoV, SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV have occurred in 
China and Saudi Arabia over the past decade, respectively. From the end of 2019, 
a great battle began by the world scientific community against SARS-CoV-2, the 
virus that caused COVID-19, a pathology that generated devastating consequences 
on all existing continents. Several mutations have already been detected in the 
structure of the virus, which have been responsible for the generation of many 
types of variants since the detection of the first COVID-19 virus identified in 
China. The worrisome mutations arising from the first genome of SARS-CoV-2 have 
been intensively studied. Some mutations increase the transmissibility of the 
disease through Spike, the protein responsible for binding the virus in the 
human cell. Among the numerous strains, the most discussed are called by the WHO 
as "variants of concern". This study aims to review if COVID-19 severity may be 
variant dependent. Our study found tree publications that associate severity of 
COVI-19 symptoms to different SARS-CoV-2 variants. The most part of publications 
do not establish which variant is being expressed during studies. More studies 
with this focus are needed for a better understanding of the disease and 
respective variants.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-024-10094-9
PMCID: PMC11566187
PMID: 39543481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Ethics approval and consent to 
participate Not applicable. Consent for publication Not applicable. Competing 
interests The authors declare no competing interests.


63. J Biol Rhythms. 2021 Feb;36(1):4-8. doi: 10.1177/0748730420953335. Epub 2020 Sep 
2.

Accounting for Time: Circadian Rhythms in the Time of COVID-19.

Sengupta S(1)(2)(3)(4), Brooks TG(3), Grant GR(3)(5), FitzGerald GA(3)(4)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(2)Division of Neonatology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(3)Institute of Translational Medicine and Therapeutics (ITMAT), University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(4)Chronobiology and Sleep Institute, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania.
(5)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia.
(6)Systems Pharmacology University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

The COVID-19 pandemic has necessitated novel approaches and collaborative 
efforts across multiple disciplines. It is known that various aspects of our 
physiology and response to pathogens are under tight clock control. However, the 
assimilation of circadian biology into our clinical and research practices is 
still evolving. Using a focused review of the literature and original analyses 
of the UK Biobank, we discuss how circadian biology may inform our diagnostic 
and therapeutic strategies in this pandemic.

DOI: 10.1177/0748730420953335
PMCID: PMC8685580
PMID: 32875944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Biol Rhythms. 2021 Feb;36(1):55-70. doi: 10.1177/0748730421992587. Epub 2021 
Feb 11.

A Timely Call to Arms: COVID-19, the Circadian Clock, and Critical Care.

Haspel J(1), Kim M(2), Zee P(2), Schwarzmeier T(3), Montagnese S(4), Panda S(5), 
Albani A(3)(6), Merrow M(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(3)Institute of Medical Psychology, Faculty of Medicine, LMU Munich, Munich, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(5)Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, California, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine IV, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany.

We currently find ourselves in the midst of a global coronavirus disease 2019 
(COVID-19) pandemic, caused by the highly infectious novel coronavirus, severe 
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Here, we discuss aspects 
of SARS-CoV-2 biology and pathology and how these might interact with the 
circadian clock of the host. We further focus on the severe manifestation of the 
illness, leading to hospitalization in an intensive care unit. The most common 
severe complications of COVID-19 relate to clock-regulated human physiology. We 
speculate on how the pandemic might be used to gain insights on the circadian 
clock but, more importantly, on how knowledge of the circadian clock might be 
used to mitigate the disease expression and the clinical course of COVID-19.

DOI: 10.1177/0748730421992587
PMCID: PMC7882674
PMID: 33573430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement: The author(s) 
have no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, 
authorship, and/or publication of this article.


65. Biomed Res Int. 2020 Oct 27;2020:6870512. doi: 10.1155/2020/6870512. eCollection 
2020.

An Updated Understanding of the Current Emerging Respiratory Infection: 
COVID-19.

Yuan H(1), Cao X(1), Ji X(2), Du F(3), He J(4), Zhou X(3), Xie Y(5), Zhu Y(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, The Second People's Hospital of Hefei 
City, Hefei 230011, China.
(2)Department of Intensive Care Unit, The Second People's Hospital of Hefei 
City, Hefei 230011, China.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Second People's Hospital of Hefei 
City, Hefei 230011, China.
(4)Department of Radiology, The Second People's Hospital of Hefei City, Hefei 
230011, China.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, The Second People's Hospital of Hefei 
City, Hefei 230011, China.
(6)School of Public Health, Wannan Medical College, Wuhu 241002, China.

According to the World Health Organization (WHO), the COVID-19 pandemic has been 
declared as a priority disease. Some patients with COVID-19 had symptoms of 
multiple organ failure and death. The published articles on COVID-19 infection 
were reviewed. The origin of SARS-CoV-2 is still not completely established. 
Person-to-person transmission via droplets, probable aerosols, or close contact 
is considered as the main mode of transmission. With increased mortality due to 
SARS-CoV-2, valuable clinical indicators or treatments should be further 
identified and summarized. CT scanning plays an important role in the diagnosis 
and evaluation of COVID-19 in asymptomatic patients or those with initially 
negative RT-PCR results. No specific antiviral therapy is recommended, except 
the main supportive treatments, and effective measures should be taken into 
consideration to protect important organs and prevent the development of acute 
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) in patients with severe infection.

Copyright © 2020 Hai Yuan et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/6870512
PMCID: PMC7591962
PMID: 33134384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We declare no competing interests.


66. Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 23;11(1):22777. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-02321-z.

Comparing the clinical efficacy of COVID-19 vaccines: a systematic review and 
network meta-analysis.

Rotshild V(#)(1)(2), Hirsh-Raccah B(#)(3)(4), Miskin I(5), Muszkat M(6), Matok 
I(3).

Author information:
(1)Pharmacoepidemiology Research Unit, Institute for Drug Research, School of 
Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, P.O.B. 12272, 
9112102, Jerusalem, Israel. Viki.Rotshild@mail.huji.ac.il.
(2)Jerusalem Distric, Clalith Health Services Community Division, Jerusalem, 
Israel. Viki.Rotshild@mail.huji.ac.il.
(3)Pharmacoepidemiology Research Unit, Institute for Drug Research, School of 
Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, P.O.B. 12272, 
9112102, Jerusalem, Israel.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Hadassah University Hospital Ein Karem, Jerusalem, 
Israel.
(5)Jerusalem Distric, Clalith Health Services Community Division, Jerusalem, 
Israel.
(6)Department of Medicine, Hadassah University Hospital Mt. Scopus, Jerusalem, 
Israel.
(#)Contributed equally

New Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) vaccines are available to prevent the 
ongoing severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) pandemic. 
We compared the efficacy of new COVID-19 vaccines to prevent symptomatic and 
severe disease in the adult population and to prevent symptomatic COVID-19 among 
the elderly. Leading medical databases were searched until August 30, 2021. 
Published phase 3 randomized controlled trials (RCTs) evaluated efficacy of the 
vaccine to prevent symptomatic and sever COVID-19 in adults were included. Two 
reviewers independently evaluated the literature search results and 
independently extracted summary data. The risk of bias was evaluated using the 
Cochrane Risk of Bias Assessment Tool. We performed a network meta-analysis 
(NMA) according to PRISMA-NMA 2015 to pool indirect comparisons between 
different vaccines regarding their relative efficacy. The primary outcomes were 
the efficacy of the vaccine against symptomatic COVID-19 in adults (PROSPERO 
registration number: CRD42021235364). Above 200,000 adult participants from 
eight phase 3 RCTs were included in NMA, of whom 52% received the intervention 
(active COVID-19 vaccine). While each of nine vaccines was tested in the unique 
clinical trial as compared to control, based on indirect comparison, BNT162b2 
and mRNA-1273 vaccines were ranked with the highest probability of efficacy 
against symptomatic COVID-19 (P-scores 0.952 and 0.843, respectively), followed 
by Gam-COVID-Vac (P-score 0.782), NVX-CoV23730 (P-score 0.700), CoronaVac 
(P-score 0.570), BN02 (P-score 0.428), WIV04 (P-score 0.327), and Ad26.COV2.S 
(P-score 0.198). No statistically significant difference was seen in the ability 
of the vaccines to prevent symptomatic disease in the elderly population. No 
vaccine was statistically significantly associated with a decreased risk for 
severe COVID-19 than other vaccines, although mRNA-1273 and Gam-COVID-Vac have 
the highest P-scores (0.899 and 0.816, respectively), indicating greater 
protection against severe disease than other vaccines. In our indirect 
comparison, the BNT162b2 and mRNA-1273 vaccines, which use mRNA technology, were 
associated with the highest efficacy to prevent symptomatic COVID-19 compared to 
other vaccines. This finding may have importance when deciding which vaccine to 
use, together with other important factors as availability of the vaccines, 
costs, logistics, side effects, and patient acceptability.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-02321-z
PMCID: PMC8611039
PMID: 34815503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


67. Brief Bioinform. 2022 Jan 17;23(1):bbab446. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbab446.

A comprehensive review of the analysis and integration of omics data for 
SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19.

Zhu Z(1), Zhang S(1), Wang P(1), Chen X(1), Bi J(1), Cheng L(1)(2), Zhang 
X(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Bioinformatics Science and Technology, Harbin Medical University, 
Harbin, Heilongjiang, China, 150081.
(2)NHC and CAMS Key Laboratory of Molecular Probe and Targeted Theranostics, 
Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang, China, 150028.
(3)McKusick-Zhang Center for Genetic Medicine, Peking Union Medical College, 
Beijing, China, 100005.

Since the first report of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2) in December 2019, over 100 million people have been infected by 
COVID-19, millions of whom have died. In the latest year, a large number of 
omics data have sprung up and helped researchers broadly study the sequence, 
chemical structure and function of SARS-CoV-2, as well as molecular abnormal 
mechanisms of COVID-19 patients. Though some successes have been achieved in 
these areas, it is necessary to analyze and mine omics data for comprehensively 
understanding SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19. Hence, we reviewed the current advantages 
and limitations of the integration of omics data herein. Firstly, we sorted out 
the sequence resources and database resources of SARS-CoV-2, including protein 
chemical structure, potential drug information and research literature 
resources. Next, we collected omics data of the COVID-19 hosts, including 
genomics, transcriptomics, microbiology and potential drug information data. And 
subsequently, based on the integration of omics data, we summarized the existing 
data analysis methods and the related research results of COVID-19 multi-omics 
data in recent years. Finally, we put forward SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) multi-omics 
data integration research direction and gave a case study to mine deeper for the 
disease mechanisms of COVID-19.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbab446
PMCID: PMC8574485
PMID: 34718395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Viruses. 2024 Aug 7;16(8):1266. doi: 10.3390/v16081266.

Mechanisms of Gut-Related Viral Persistence in Long COVID.

McMillan P(1), Turner AJ(2), Uhal BD(3).

Author information:
(1)McMillan Research Ltd., London WC2H 9JQ, UK.
(2)School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of 
Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK.
(3)Department of Physiology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, 
USA.

Long COVID (post-acute sequelae of COVID-19-PASC) is a consequence of infection 
by SARS-CoV-2 that continues to disrupt the well-being of millions of affected 
individuals for many months beyond their first infection. While the exact 
mechanisms underlying PASC remain to be defined, hypotheses regarding the 
pathogenesis of long COVID are varied and include (but are not limited to) 
dysregulated local or systemic inflammatory responses, autoimmune mechanisms, 
viral-induced hormonal imbalances, skeletal muscle abnormalities, complement 
dysregulation, novel abzymes, and long-term persistence of virus and/or 
fragments of viral RNA or proteins. This review article is based on a 
comprehensive review of the wide range of symptoms most often observed in long 
COVID and an attempt to integrate that information into a plausible hypothesis 
for the pathogenesis of PASC. In particular, it is proposed that long-term 
dysregulation of the gut in response to viral persistence could lead to the 
myriad of symptoms observed in PASC.

DOI: 10.3390/v16081266
PMCID: PMC11360392
PMID: 39205240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Philip McMillan was an employee of McMillan 
Research Ltd. The other authors declare no conflicts of interest.


69. Respir Res. 2021 Nov 27;22(1):304. doi: 10.1186/s12931-021-01885-8.

Repurposed pharmacological agents for the potential treatment of COVID-19: a 
literature review.

Kröker A(1), Tirzīte M(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia. alina.kroeker@outlook.com.
(2)Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia.
(3)Riga East University Hospital, Clinical Centre "Gailezers", Riga, Latvia.

BACKGROUND: The COVID-19 pandemic has affected the world extraordinarily. This 
disease has a potential to cause a significantly severe course of disease 
leading to respiratory complications, multiple organ failure and possibly death. 
In the fight against this pandemic-causing disease, medical professionals around 
the world are searching for pharmacological agents that could treat and prevent 
disease progression and mortality. To speed the search of promising treatment 
options, already existing pharmacological agents are repurposed for the 
potential treatment of COVID-19 and tested in clinical trials. The aim of this 
literature review is to investigate the efficacy and safety of repurposed 
pharmacological agents for the treatment of COVID-19 at different 
pathophysiologic stages of the disease. For this literature review, 
online-databases PubMed and Google Scholar were utilised. Keywords "COVID-19", 
"SARS-CoV-2", "pathogenesis", "drug targets", "pharmacological treatment", 
"cytokine storm", "coagulopathy" and individual drug names were used. Scientific 
articles, including reviews, clinical trials, and observational cohorts, were 
collected and analysed. Furthermore, these articles were examined for references 
to find more clinical trials testing for the potential treatment of COVID-19. In 
total, 97 references were used to conduct this research paper.
RESULTS: The most beneficial pharmacological agent for the treatment of COVID-19 
are corticosteroids, especially dexamethasone, for the treatment of mechanically 
ventilated COVID-19 patients. Other promising agents are remdesivir for the 
treatment of patients with COVID-19 pneumonia requiring minimal supplemental 
oxygen therapy, and IL-6 receptor antagonist monoclonal antibodies in severe 
COVID-19. Lopinavir/ritonavir, as well as chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine with 
or without azithromycin demonstrate the least efficacy in the treatment of 
COVID-19. The clinical benefits of the treatment of a COVID-19-specific 
coagulopathy with increased dosing of anticoagulation need further research and 
confirmation of randomised controlled trials.
CONCLUSION: The search for pharmacological treatment of COVID-19 has elicited 
great controversy. Whereas drugs like chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine, and 
lopinavir/ritonavir have not shown proven benefit, the agents remdesivir and 
dexamethasone are recommended for clinical use for the treatment of COVID-19. 
Further randomised trials for other pharmacological treatment strategies are 
awaited.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-021-01885-8
PMCID: PMC8626754
PMID: 34838020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


70. Med Hypotheses. 2021 Jan;146:110363. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2020.110363. Epub 2020 
Nov 16.

Hydrothermotherapy in prevention and treatment of mild to moderate cases of 
COVID-19.

Ramirez FE(1), Sanchez A(2), Pirskanen AT(3).

Author information:
(1)Weimar Institute, 20601 West Paoli Lane, Weimar, CA 95736, United States. 
Electronic address: eramirez@weimar.edu.
(2)Weimar Institute, 20601 West Paoli Lane, Weimar, CA 95736, United States.
(3)Terveysprojekti Karpalo ry, Suonenjoki, Finland.

COVID-19 is a new contagious disease caused by a new coronavirus known as severe 
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). COVID-19 is a disease 
that has reached every continent in the world; it has overloaded the medical 
system worldwide and it has been declared a pandemic by the World Health 
Organization. Currently there is no definite treatment for COVID-19. We realize 
that host immunity is a critical factor in the outcome of coronavirus 2 
infection. Here, however, we review the pathophysiology of the disease with a 
focus on searching for what we can do to combat this new disease. From this, we 
find that coronavirus is sensitive to heat. We have thus focused on this area of 
vulnerability of the virus. The emphasis of this hypothesis is on the action of 
body heat-internal (fever) and external (heat treatment)-in activating the 
immune system and its antiviral activities, and specifically related to the 
coronavirus. We hypothesize from this review that heat treatments has the 
potential to prevent COVID-19 and to decrease the severity of mild and moderate 
cases of Coronavirus. We propose heat treatments for this uncontrolled worldwide 
coronavirus pandemic while studies are being done to test the effectiveness of 
heat treatments in the prevention and treatment of COVID-19.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2020.110363
PMCID: PMC7668174
PMID: 33303302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


71. In Vivo. 2021 Mar-Apr;35(2):1285-1294. doi: 10.21873/invivo.12380.

The Experience of Greece as a Model to Contain COVID-19 Infection Spread.

Delinasios GJ(1), Fragkou PC(2), Gkirmpa AM(3), Tsangaris G(3), Hoffman 
RM(4)(5), Anagnostopoulos AK(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)International Institute of Anticancer Research, Kapandriti, Greece; 
atanagnost@biocademy.gr george.delinasios@iiar-anticancer.org.
(2)Fourth Department of Internal Medicine, Attikon University Hospital, National 
and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(3)Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(4)AntiCancer Inc., San Diego, CA, U.S.A.
(5)Department of Surgery, University of San Diego, San Diego, CA, U.S.A.

The severe acute respiratory syndrome corona virus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) emerged in 
late 2019 and has caused a pandemic known as corona virus disease 2019 
(COVID-19), responsible for the death of more than 2 million people worldwide. 
The outbreak of COVID-19 has posed an unprecedented threat on human lives and 
public safety. The aim of this review is to describe key aspects of the 
bio-pathology of the novel disease, and discuss aspects of its spread, as well 
as targeted protective strategies that can help shape the outcome of the present 
and future health crises. Greece is used as a model to inhibit SARS-COV-2 
spread, since it is one of the countries with the lowest fatality rates among 
nations of the European Union (E.U.), following two consecutive waves of 
COVID-19 pandemic. Furthermore, niche research technological approaches and 
scientific recommendations that emerged during the COVID-19 era are discussed.

Copyright© 2021, International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. George J. 
Delinasios), All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21873/invivo.12380
PMCID: PMC8045105
PMID: 33622932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The Authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.


72. Microb Pathog. 2021 Jan;150:104673. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2020.104673. Epub 
2020 Dec 2.

The interplay between inflammatory pathways and COVID-19: A critical review on 
pathogenesis and therapeutic options.

Choudhary S(1), Sharma K(1), Silakari O(2).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Modeling Lab, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Drug 
Research, Punjabi University, Patiala, Punjab, 147002, India.
(2)Molecular Modeling Lab, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Drug 
Research, Punjabi University, Patiala, Punjab, 147002, India. Electronic 
address: omsilakari@gmail.com.

COVID-19, caused by SARS-CoV-2, emerged as the deadliest outbreak that has now 
become a serious health issue to mankind. Activation of inflammatory signaling 
pathways and cytokine storm are crucial factors that lead to acute respiratory 
distress syndrome (ARDS) in COVID-19 patients. Excessive secretion of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines leads to the dysregulation of the 
innate immune system. The cytokine storm attracts many inflammatory cells that 
infiltrate into the lung tissues and ultimately cause immune damage. In addition 
to the dysregulation of the immune system, dysfunction of the renin-angiotensin 
system (RAS) due to the downregulation of ACE2 is also associated with the 
mortality of COVID-19 patients. Both the mechanisms are directly or indirectly 
associated with cytokine storm that promotes vascular hyperpermeability, 
vascular edema leading to hypercoagulation and hence multiorgan damage. As of 
now, there is no specific treatment available for COVID-19, but scientists have 
purposed several treatment options including cytokine inhibitors, JAK 
inhibitors, immunomodulators, plasma therapy, etc. In this article, we have 
provided the detailed mechanism of occurrence of SARS-CoV-2 induced inflammatory 
storm and its connection with the pre-existing inflammatory conditions. Possible 
treatment options to cope up with the severe clinical manifestations of COVID-19 
are also discussed.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2020.104673
PMCID: PMC7709793
PMID: 33278517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.


73. Hum Genomics. 2020 Dec 22;14(1):47. doi: 10.1186/s40246-020-00300-5.

A rational approach to COVID-19.

Mehrian-Shai R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan, 
Israel. Ruty.shai@sheba.health.gov.il.

It is crucial to use the wealth of information emerging from the ongoing 
SARS-CoV-2 pandemic and confront COVID-19 with a rational approach. There are 
proactive steps to prevent and fight COVID-19. Management of the disease should 
be according to clinical features and laboratory test markers and personalized 
therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.1186/s40246-020-00300-5
PMCID: PMC7753102
PMID: 33353565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


74. Brief Bioinform. 2022 Jan 17;23(1):bbab406. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbab406.

Advances, challenges and opportunities of phylogenetic and social network 
analysis using COVID-19 data.

Wang Y(1), Zhao Y(1), Pan Q(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Mathematical and Natural Science, Arizona State University, 4701 W 
Thunderbird Rd, 85306, Arizona, USA.
(2)Department of Statistics, George Washington University, 801 22nd St. NW, 
20052, Washington DC, USA.

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has attracted research interests from all 
fields. Phylogenetic and social network analyses based on connectivity between 
either COVID-19 patients or geographic regions and similarity between syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) sequences provide unique angles to answer public 
health and pharmaco-biological questions such as relationships between various 
SARS-CoV-2 mutants, the transmission pathways in a community and the 
effectiveness of prevention policies. This paper serves as a systematic review 
of current phylogenetic and social network analyses with applications in 
COVID-19 research. Challenges in current phylogenetic network analysis on 
SARS-CoV-2 such as unreliable inferences, sampling bias and batch effects are 
discussed as well as potential solutions. Social network analysis combined with 
epidemiology models helps to identify key transmission characteristics and 
measure the effectiveness of prevention and control strategies. Finally, future 
new directions of network analysis motivated by COVID-19 data are summarized.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbab406
PMID: 34601563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2020 Nov 2;10:576875. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2020.576875. eCollection 2020.

CRISPR-Cas System: An Approach With Potentials for COVID-19 Diagnosis and 
Therapeutics.

Kumar P(1), Malik YS(2)(3), Ganesh B(4), Rahangdale S(5)(6), Saurabh S(6), 
Natesan S(7), Srivastava A(1), Sharun K(8), Yatoo MI(9), Tiwari R(10), Singh 
RK(11), Dhama K(12).

Author information:
(1)Amity Institute of Virology and Immunology, Amity University, Noida, India.
(2)Division of Biological Standardization, Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research-Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Bareilly, India.
(3)College of Animal Biotechnology, Guru Angad Dev Veterinary and Animal Science 
University, Ludhiana, India.
(4)Laboratory Division, Indian Council of Medical Research-National Institute of 
Epidemiology, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Chennai, India.
(5)Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), CSIR-HRDC Campus, 
Ghaziabad, India.
(6)Plant Molecular Biology and Biotechnology Division, CSIR-National Botanical 
Research Institute, Lucknow, India.
(7)Indian Institute of Public Health Gandhinagar, Gandhinagar, India.
(8)Division of Surgery, ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Bareilly, 
India.
(9)Division of Veterinary Clinical Complex, Faculty of Veterinary Sciences and 
Animal Husbandry, Sher-E-Kashmir University of Agricultural Sciences and 
Technology of Kashmir, Srinagar, India.
(10)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Immunology, College of Veterinary 
Sciences, UP Pandit Deen Dayal Upadhayay Pashu Chikitsa Vigyan Vishwavidyalay 
Evum Go-Anusandhan Sansthan (DUVASU), Mathura, India.
(11)Division of Veterinary Biotechnology, ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research 
Institute, Bareilly, India.
(12)Division of Pathology, ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Bareilly, 
India.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2021 Apr 10;397(10282):1346-1347. doi: 
10.1016/S0140-6736(21)00470-0.

COVID-19, the human coronavirus disease caused by SARS-CoV-2, was reported for 
the first time in Wuhan, China in late 2019. COVID-19 has no preventive vaccine 
or proven standard pharmacological treatment, and consequently, the outbreak 
swiftly became a pandemic affecting more than 215 countries around the world. 
For the diagnosis of COVID-19, the only reliable diagnostics is a qPCR assay. 
Among other diagnostic tools, the CRISPR-Cas system is being investigated for 
rapid and specific diagnosis of COVID-19. The CRISPR-Cas-based methods diagnose 
the SARS-CoV-2 infections within an hour. Apart from its diagnostic 
ability, CRISPR-Cas system is also being assessed for antiviral therapy 
development; however, till date, no CRISPR-based therapy has been approved for 
human use. The Prophylactic Antiviral CRISPR in huMAN cells (PAC-MAN), which is 
Cas 13 based strategy, has been developed against coronavirus. Although this 
strategy has the potential to be developed as a therapeutic modality, it may 
face significant challenges for approval in human clinical trials. This review 
is focused on describing potential use and challenges of CRISPR-Cas based 
approaches for the development of rapid and accurate diagnostic technique and/or 
a possible therapeutic alternative for combating COVID-19. The assessment of 
potential risks associated with use of CRISPR will be important for future 
clinical advancements.

Copyright © 2020 Kumar, Malik, Ganesh, Rahangdale, Saurabh, Natesan, Srivastava, 
Sharun, Yatoo, Tiwari, Singh and Dhama.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2020.576875
PMCID: PMC7673385
PMID: 33251158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Tumori. 2021 Feb;107(1):6-11. doi: 10.1177/0300891620977916. Epub 2020 Dec 9.

Lessons learned from COVID-19 for clinical research operations in Italy: what 
have we learned and what can we apply in the future?

Cagnazzo C(1), Besse MG(2), Manfellotto D(3), Minghetti P(4), Cazzaniga S(5), 
Cottini L(6), Fontanella A(7), Maruti I(8), Stabile S(9), Testoni S(10), Trogu 
P(11), Sinno V(12), Gussoni G(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health and Pediatrics, University of Turin, Turin, 
Italy.
(2)Medical Affairs, Servier Italia SpA, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Fatebenefratelli-AFaR, Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(5)Janssen-Cilag SpA, Milan, Italy.
(6)High Research, Milan, Italy.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Madonna del Buonconsiglio Fatebenefratelli 
Hospital, Naples, Italy.
(8)Roche SpA, Switzerland.
(9)Oncology Department, Niguarda Cancer Center, Grande Ospedale Metropolitano 
Niguarda, Milan, Italy.
(10)Biostatistics and Clinical Trials Unit, Istituto Scientifico Romagnolo per 
lo Studio e la Cura dei Tumori (IRST) IRCCS, Meldola (FC), Italy.
(11)Bayer SpA, Milan, Italy.
(12)Department of Medical Oncology, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei 
Tumori, Milan, Italy.
(13)Clinical Research Department, "Centro Studi" FADOI, Milan, Italy.

Erratum in
    Tumori. 2021 Apr;107(2):176. doi: 10.1177/03008916211003365.

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has stressed the importance of 
health research as never before. In the specific domain of clinical research, 
the effort to rapidly find responses to health challenges and therapeutic 
hypotheses has highlighted the need for efficient, timely, ethically correct 
research. The guidelines published by the Agenzia Italiana del Farmaco have 
shown that some useful changes are feasible: simple and rapid methods have been 
implemented to conduct clinical research in the emergency conditions of the 
pandemic, maintaining high levels of quality. In this perspective, four Italian 
scientific associations operating in clinical research have worked together to 
evaluate which measures, among the ones implemented during the pandemic, have 
been particularly significant and potentially effective under normal conditions 
or in case of emergencies, and that therefore will be useful in the future as 
well.

DOI: 10.1177/0300891620977916
PMCID: PMC7726625
PMID: 33297885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The 
authors have no conflicts of interest to declare. As claimed explicitly in the 
affiliations, some authors (M-G.B., S.C., I.M., P.T) are members of the 
promoting Scientific Associations as well as employees in pharmaceutical 
companies.


77. Epigenomics. 2021 May;13(10):745-750. doi: 10.2217/epi-2021-0057. Epub 2021 Apr 
20.

Epigenomics in COVID-19; the link between DNA methylation, histone modifications 
and SARS-CoV-2 infection.

Shirvaliloo M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Student Research Committee, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, 
5166 Tabriz, Iran.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, 15731 Tabriz, 
Iran.

DOI: 10.2217/epi-2021-0057
PMCID: PMC8074570
PMID: 33876664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2020 Oct 28;10:560240. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2020.560240. eCollection 2020.

Systems Biology Approaches for Therapeutics Development Against COVID-19.

Jaiswal S(1), Kumar M(2)(3), Mandeep(1), Sunita(1)(4), Singh Y(4), Shukla P(1).

Author information:
(1)Enzyme Technology and Protein Bioinformatics Laboratory, Department of 
Microbiology, Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak, India.
(2)Soil Microbial Ecology and Environmental Toxicology Laboratory, Department of 
Zoology, University of Delhi, Delhi, India.
(3)Department of Zoology, Hindu College, University of Delhi, Delhi, India.
(4)Bacterial Pathogenesis Laboratory, Department of Zoology, University of 
Delhi, Delhi, India.

Understanding the systems biology approaches for promoting the development of 
new therapeutic drugs is attaining importance nowadays. The threat of COVID-19 
outbreak needs to be vanished for global welfare, and every section of research 
is focusing on it. There is an opportunity for finding new, quick, and accurate 
tools for developing treatment options, including the vaccine against COVID-19. 
The review at this moment covers various aspects of pathogenesis and host 
factors for exploring the virus target and developing suitable therapeutic 
solutions through systems biology tools. Furthermore, this review also covers 
the extensive details of multiomics tools i.e., transcriptomics, proteomics, 
genomics, lipidomics, immunomics, and in silico computational modeling aiming 
towards the study of host-virus interactions in search of therapeutic targets 
against the COVID-19.

Copyright © 2020 Jaiswal, Kumar, Mandeep, Sunita, Singh and Shukla.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2020.560240
PMCID: PMC7655984
PMID: 33194800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Vet Med Sci. 2021 Mar;7(2):559-571. doi: 10.1002/vms3.394. Epub 2020 Nov 18.

Evolutionary study of COVID-19, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2) as an emerging coronavirus: Phylogenetic analysis and literature 
review.

Tabibzadeh A(1), Esghaei M(1), Soltani S(2), Yousefi P(1), Taherizadeh M(3), 
Safarnezhad Tameshkel F(4), Golahdooz M(3), Panahi M(4), Ajdarkosh H(4), Zamani 
F(4), Karbalaie Niya MH(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology, Faculty of Medicine, Iran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Virology, Faculty of Public Health, Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Virology, Rabies Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, 
Tehran, Iran.
(4)Gastrointestinal and Liver Diseases Research Center, Iran University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Since emerging coronaviruses have always become a human health concern globally 
especially severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV) and Middle 
East respiratory syndrome coronavirus and a novel coronavirus was introduced in 
Wuhan, China, in December 2019 (called SARS-CoV-2), many researchers focused on 
its epidemics, virological and clinical features. SARS-CoV-2 is classified as 
Betacoronaviruses genus and Sarbecovirus subgenus (lineage B). The virus shows a 
great similarity with SARS-CoV and bat SARS-like coronaviruses. In this study, 
we evaluate SARS-CoV-2 virus phylogeny and evolution by using current virus and 
related sequences.

© 2020 The Authors Veterinary Medicine and Science Published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/vms3.394
PMCID: PMC7753621
PMID: 33210477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.


80. Chemotherapy. 2021;66(1-2):17-23. doi: 10.1159/000515343. Epub 2021 Mar 19.

SARS-CoV-2 Infection and the COVID-19 Pandemic Emergency: The Importance of 
Diagnostic Methods.

Ciotti M(1), Benedetti F(2), Zella D(2), Angeletti S(3), Ciccozzi M(4), 
Bernardini S(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Virology Unit, Laboratory of Clinical Microbiology and Virology, Polyclinic 
Tor Vergata Foundation, Rome, Italy, marco.ciotti@ptvonline.it.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of Human 
Virology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(3)Unit of Clinical Laboratory Science, University Campus Bio-Medico of Rome, 
Rome, Italy.
(4)Unit of Medical Statistics and Molecular Epidemiology, University Campus 
Bio-Medico of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, 
Italy.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Polyclinic Tor Vergata Foundation, Rome, 
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Currently, a pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused 
by the novel coronavirus severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2) is underway, resulting in high morbidity and mortality across the 
globe.
SUMMARY: A prompt and effective diagnosis is crucial to identify infected 
individuals, to monitor the infection, to perform contact tracing, and to limit 
the spread of the virus. Since the announcement of this public health emergency, 
several diagnostic methods have been developed including molecular and 
serological assays, and more recently biosensors. Here, we present the use of 
these assays as well as their main technical features, advantages, and limits. 
Key Messages: The development of reliable diagnostic assays is crucial not only 
for a correct diagnosis and containment of COVID-19 pandemic, but also for the 
decision-making process that is behind the clinical decisions, eventually 
contributing to the improvement of patient management. Furthermore, with the 
advent of vaccine and therapeutic monoclonal antibodies against SARS-CoV-2, 
serological assays will be instrumental for the validation of these new 
therapeutic options.

© 2021 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000515343
PMCID: PMC8089410
PMID: 33744904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.


81. Horm Mol Biol Clin Investig. 2021 Jul 30;42(4):425-428. doi: 
10.1515/hmbci-2021-0006.

COVID-19 transmission: a positive perspective.

Sakarde A(1), Takhelmayum R(1), Garg S(2), Kushwaha AS(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, AIIMS Nagpur, Nagpur, Maharashtra, India.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University College of Medical Sciences, Delhi, 
India.
(3)Department of Community Medicine, AIIMS Nagpur, Nagpur, Maharashtra, India.

OBJECTIVES: To understand the dynamics of infectivity of COVID-19 and allay the 
fear and anxiety associated with it in healthcare workers and the society.
CASE PRESENTATION: Three individuals accompanied their pediatric patients in the 
COVID ward but did not develop infection. Information about their knowledge and 
perspective about the disease and the protective measures undertaken by them 
during their stay in the hospital was gathered by administering a questionnaire 
14 days after discharge.
CONCLUSIONS: It was observed that use of proper precautionary measures like 
wearing a mask and regular hand sanitization helped in prevention from COVID-19 
infection even after having close contact with confirmed cases. Such 
facts/observation will help in sensitizing the public about COVID-19 and 
eliminate panic in the society.

© 2021 Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin/Boston.

DOI: 10.1515/hmbci-2021-0006
PMID: 34331846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Cancer Invest. 2021 Jan;39(1):1-2. doi: 10.1080/07357907.2020.1847383. Epub 2020 
Nov 11.

Emotional Burden Associated with COVID-19: Trust and Communication in Cancer 
Care.

Bergerot CD(1), Philip EJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Câncer de Brasília (CETTRO), Instituto Unity de Ensino e Pesquisa, 
Brasília, Brazil.
(2)University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Erratum in
    Cancer Invest. 2021 Apr;39(4):I. doi: 10.1080/07357907.2021.1893509.

DOI: 10.1080/07357907.2020.1847383
PMID: 33148064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Nature. 2022 Nov;611(7935):213-214. doi: 10.1038/d41586-022-03445-6.

COVID 'variant soup' is making winter surges hard to predict.

Callaway E.

DOI: 10.1038/d41586-022-03445-6
PMID: 36307585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Bioorg Chem. 2021 Sep;114:105016. doi: 10.1016/j.bioorg.2021.105016. Epub 2021 
May 25.

Potential drug development and therapeutic approaches for clinical intervention 
in COVID-19.

Dowarah J(1), Marak BN(1), Yadav UCS(2), Singh VP(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, School of Physical Sciences, Mizoram University, 
Aizawl 796004, Mizoram, India.
(2)Special Centre for Molecular Medicine, JNU, New Delhi 110067, India.
(3)Department of Chemistry, School of Physical Sciences, Mizoram University, 
Aizawl 796004, Mizoram, India; Department of Industrial Chemistry, School of 
Physical Sciences, Mizoram University, Aizawl 796004, Mizoram, India. Electronic 
address: vpsingh@mzu.edu.in.

While the vaccination is now available to many countries and will slowly 
dissipate to others, effective therapeutics for COVID-19 is still illusive. The 
SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has posed an unprecedented challenge to researchers, 
scientists, and clinicians and affected the wellbeing of millions of people 
worldwide. Since the beginning of the pandemic, a multitude of existing 
anti-viral, antibiotic, antimalarial, and anticancer drugs have been tested, and 
some have shown potency in the treatment and management of COVID-19, albeit 
others failed to leave any positive impact and a few also became controversial 
as they showed mixed clinical outcomes. In the present article, we have brought 
together some of the candidate therapeutic drugs being repurposed or used in the 
clinical trials and discussed their clinical efficacy and safety for COVID-19.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bioorg.2021.105016
PMCID: PMC8143914
PMID: 34144277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.


85. Biochim Biophys Acta Rev Cancer. 2020 Dec;1874(2):188412. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbcan.2020.188412. Epub 2020 Aug 20.

COVID-19 and cancer: A guide with suggested COVID-19 rule-out criteria to 
support clinical decision-making.

Larson C(1), Oronsky B(2), Goyal S(3), Ray C(4), Hedjran F(1), Hammond TC(5), 
Kesari S(5), Caroen S(1), Lybeck M(1), Dobalian VE(6), Oronsky A(7), Reid T(1).

Author information:
(1)EpicentRx, Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA.
(2)EpicentRx, Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA. Electronic address: 
boronsky@epicentrx.com.
(3)George Washington University, Washington, DC, USA.
(4)St. Francis Hospital and Medical Center, Hartford, CT, USA.
(5)John Wayne Cancer Institute at Providence St. John's Health, Santa Monica, 
CA, USA.
(6)Beaches Pediatric Endocrinology, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(7)InterWest Partners, Menlo Park, CA, USA.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is a highly 
contagious zoonotic pathogen that has exacted heavy public health, social and 
economic tolls. In February 2020, the World Health Organization acronymed the 
disease caused by SARS-CoV-2 as COVID-19, for coronavirus disease 2019. The 
number of confirmed COVID-19 infections, which has been detected in at least 103 
countries, has reached 1,970,225 worldwide as of April 14, 2020 with 124,544 
deaths, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 
Many cases of COVID-19 resolve quickly. However, the disease, which, like other 
respiratory pathogens that cause common cold symptoms is believed to be 
transmitted through respiratory droplets. Infection with COVID-19 can also lead 
to significant morbidity and death; this is particularly the case for cancer 
patients. Moreover, because the signs and symptoms of COVID-19 are easily 
misattributed to the sequelae of cancer itself, such as pulmonary embolism, or 
its treatment, such as nausea and diarrhea, diagnosis may be delayed or missed. 
Potential COVID-19 rule out criteria, based on the Wells' criteria for pulmonary 
embolism, another protean disease entity, are provided as a decision-making aid. 
This review summarizes the current understanding of the transmission, clinical 
presentation, diagnosis and differential diagnosis, pathogenesis, rationale to 
treat the cancer or not, treatment and prevention of COVID-19 with an emphasis 
on implications in cancer.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2020.188412
PMCID: PMC7438345
PMID: 32827582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.


86. PLoS One. 2022 Feb 24;17(2):e0264198. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0264198. 
eCollection 2022.

Forecasting emergence of COVID-19 variants of concern.

Miller JK(1), Elenberg K(2), Dubrawski A(1).

Author information:
(1)Auton Systems LLC, Pittsburgh, PA, United States of America.
(2)United States Department of Defense Covid Task Force, Washington, DC, United 
States of America.

We consider whether one can forecast the emergence of variants of concern in the 
SARS-CoV-2 outbreak and similar pandemics. We explore methods of population 
genetics and identify key relevant principles in both deterministic and 
stochastic models of spread of infectious disease. Finally, we demonstrate that 
fitness variation, defined as a trait for which an increase in its value is 
associated with an increase in net Darwinian fitness if the value of other 
traits are held constant, is a strong indicator of imminent transition in the 
viral population.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0264198
PMCID: PMC8870573
PMID: 35202422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Commercial affiliation of authors KM and AD with 
Auton Systems LLC does not alter our adherence to all PLOS ONE policies on 
sharing data and materials.


87. Brief Bioinform. 2022 Jan 17;23(1):bbab455. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbab455.

Integrative COVID-19 biological network inference with probabilistic core 
decomposition.

Guo Y(1), Esfahani F(2), Shao X(3), Srinivasan V(2), Thomo A(2), Xing L(4), 
Zhang X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Victoria, 3800 
Finnerty Road, V8P 5C2, Victoria, BC, Canada.
(2)Department of Computer Science, University of Victoria, 3800 Finnerty Road, 
V8P 5C2, Victoria, BC, Canada.
(3)Digital Technologies Research Centre, National Research Council Canada, 1200 
Montreal Road, K1A 0R6, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(4)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Saskatchewan, 110 
Science Place, S7N 5A2, Saskatoon, SK, Canada.

The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is responsible 
for millions of deaths around the world. To help contribute to the understanding 
of crucial knowledge and to further generate new hypotheses relevant to 
SARS-CoV-2 and human protein interactions, we make use of the information 
abundant Biomine probabilistic database and extend the experimentally identified 
SARS-CoV-2-human protein-protein interaction (PPI) network in silico. We 
generate an extended network by integrating information from the Biomine 
database, the PPI network and other experimentally validated results. To 
generate novel hypotheses, we focus on the high-connectivity sub-communities 
that overlap most with the integrated experimentally validated results in the 
extended network. Therefore, we propose a new data analysis pipeline that can 
efficiently compute core decomposition on the extended network and identify 
dense subgraphs. We then evaluate the identified dense subgraph and the 
generated hypotheses in three contexts: literature validation for uncovered 
virus targeting genes and proteins, gene function enrichment analysis on 
subgraphs and literature support on drug repurposing for identified tissues and 
diseases related to COVID-19. The major types of the generated hypotheses are 
proteins with their encoding genes and we rank them by sorting their connections 
to the integrated experimentally validated nodes. In addition, we compile a 
comprehensive list of novel genes, and proteins potentially related to COVID-19, 
as well as novel diseases which might be comorbidities. Together with the 
generated hypotheses, our results provide novel knowledge relevant to COVID-19 
for further validation.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbab455
PMCID: PMC8689992
PMID: 34791019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2021 Sep;147(9):2621-2624. doi: 
10.1007/s00432-021-03707-2. Epub 2021 Jul 5.

Effectiveness of low-dose radiation therapy to improve mortality of COVID-19.

Ghaznavi H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Faculty of Paramedical Sciences, Kurdistan 
University of Medical Sciences, Sanandaj, Iran. hamid.ghaznavi@muk.ac.ir.

INTRODUCTION: Performing low-dose radiation therapy (LDRT) is a new approach to 
treat pneumonia resulting from COVID-19 disease. This paper aims to evaluate the 
effectiveness of LDRT in treating COVID-19 patients.
METHODS: Medline was searched for "low-dose" and "radiation therapy" and 
"COVID-19" and "pneumonia" and "inflammation", to retrieve papers that published 
on low-dose radiation therapy to improve mortality of COVID-19 patients. Only 
clinical investigations that included original and case report papers were 
selected for this paper.
RESULTS: The completed clinical trials that have performed LDRT to treat 
COVID-19 showed that the effectiveness of LDRT in treating COVID-19 was up to 
90%.
CONCLUSION: The vast majority of primary and secondary outcomes of clinical 
trial investigations regarding LDRT in treating COVID-19 found that LDRT can be 
considered a feasible treatment to improve mortality of COVID-19 patients.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00432-021-03707-2
PMCID: PMC8255161
PMID: 34219180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declare that they have no conflict of 
interest.


89. FEBS Lett. 2021 Dec;595(23):2847-2853. doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.14226. Epub 2021 
Nov 16.

Two years into COVID-19 - Lessons in SARS-CoV-2 and a perspective from papers in 
FEBS Letters.

Greber UF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zürich, Switzerland.

The 2019 outbreak of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Wuhan (Hubei province of 
China) has given rise to a pandemic spread of virus, more than 240 million 
incidences and a death toll larger than 5 million people. COVID-19 has set off 
large efforts in research, therapy and patient care, as well as public and 
private debates in every imaginable form. A number of scientists used the 
publication platforms provided by the Federation of the European Biochemical 
Societies (FEBS) to present their research data, reviews, opinions and other 
contributions relating to COVID-19 and severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Here, I highlight the recent COVID-19 papers which 
have been published and collected in a Virtual Issue in FEBS Letters, and 
discuss their implications towards understanding the molecular, biochemical and 
cellular mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2 infections, vaccine development and antiviral 
discovery strategies.

© 2021 The Author. FEBS Letters published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of 
Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1002/1873-3468.14226
PMCID: PMC8652506
PMID: 34787897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Biomed Pharmacother. 2021 Oct;142:112023. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2021.112023. 
Epub 2021 Aug 10.

Repurposing methylene blue in the management of COVID-19: Mechanistic aspects 
and clinical investigations.

Dabholkar N(1), Gorantla S(1), Dubey SK(2), Alexander A(3), Taliyan R(1), 
Singhvi G(4).

Author information:
(1)Industrial Research Laboratory, Department of Pharmacy, Birla Institute of 
Technology and Science (BITS), Pilani, Pilani Campus, Rajasthan, India.
(2)Medical Research, R&D Healthcare Division, Emami Ltd, Kolkata, India.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutics, National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education 
and Research (NIPER), Guwahati, Assam 781101, India.
(4)Industrial Research Laboratory, Department of Pharmacy, Birla Institute of 
Technology and Science (BITS), Pilani, Pilani Campus, Rajasthan, India. 
Electronic address: gautam.singhvi@pilani.bits-pilani.ac.in.

The severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the most 
recent coronaviruses, which has infected humans, and caused the disease 
COVID-19. The World Health Organization has declared COVID-19 as a pandemic in 
March 2020. The SARS-CoV-2 enters human hosts majorly via the respiratory tract, 
affecting the lungs first. In few critical cases, the infection progresses to 
failure of the respiratory system known as acute respiratory distress syndrome 
acute respiratory distress syndrome may be further associated with multi-organ 
failure and vasoplegic shock. Currently, the treatment of COVID-19 involves use 
of antiviral and anti-cytokine drugs. However, both the drugs have low efficacy 
because they cannot inhibit the production of free radicals and cytokines at the 
same time. Recently, some researchers have reported the use of methylene blue 
(MB) in COVID-19 management. MB has been used since a long time as a therapeutic 
agent, and has been approved by the US FDA for the treatment of other diseases. 
The additional advantage of MB is its low cost. MB is a safe drug when used in 
the dose of < 2 mg/kg. In this review, the applicability of MB in COVID-19 and 
its mechanistic aspects have been explored and compiled. The clinical studies 
have been explained in great detail. Thus, the potential of MB in the management 
of COVID-19 has been examined.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2021.112023
PMCID: PMC8352658
PMID: 34399199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors declare no conflict of interest.


91. Biomed Pharmacother. 2021 Nov;143:112158. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2021.112158. 
Epub 2021 Sep 4.

A mini-review on the impact of COVID 19 on vital organs.

Shah MD(1), Sumeh AS(2), Sheraz M(3), Kavitha MS(4), Venmathi Maran BA(5), 
Rodrigues KF(6).

Author information:
(1)Borneo Marine Research Institute, Universiti Malaysia Sabah, Jalan UMS, 88400 
Kota Kinabalu, Sabah, Malaysia. Electronic address: dawoodshah@ums.edu.my.
(2)Penampang Health Clinic, Kampung Tuavon, 89500 Penampang, Sabah, Malaysia.
(3)Arbutus Biopharma Inc, 701 Veterans Circle, Warminster, PA 18974, USA.
(4)School of Information and Data Sciences, Nagasaki University, Bunkyo-machi 
1-14, Nagasaki 852-8521, Japan. Electronic address: kavitha@nagasaki-u.ac.jp.
(5)Borneo Marine Research Institute, Universiti Malaysia Sabah, Jalan UMS, 88400 
Kota Kinabalu, Sabah, Malaysia. Electronic address: bavmaran@ums.edu.my.
(6)Biotechnology Research Institute, Universiti Malaysia Sabah, Jalan UMS, 88400 
Kota Kinabalu, Sabah, Malaysia. Electronic address: kennethr@ums.edu.my.

COVID-19 (Corona Virus Disease-2019) is an infectious disease caused by a novel 
coronavirus, known as the acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). 
This is a highly contagious disease that has already affected more than 220 
countries globally, infecting more than 212 million people and resulting in the 
death of over 4.4 million people. This review aims to highlight the pertinent 
documentary evidence upon the adverse effects of the SARS-CoV-2 infection on 
several vital human organs. SARS-CoV-2 primarily targets the lung tissue by 
causing diffuse alveolar damage and may result in Acute Respiratory Distress 
Syndrome (ARDS). SARS-CoV-2 infects the cell via cell surface receptor, 
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). Besides lungs, SARS-CoV-2 critically 
damage tissues in other vital human organs such as the heart, kidney, liver, 
brain, and gastrointestinal tract. The effect on the heart includes muscle 
dysfunction (acute or protracted heart failure), myocarditis, and cell necrosis. 
Within hepatic tissue, it alters serum aminotransferase, total bilirubin, and 
gamma-glutamyl transferase levels. It contributes to acute kidney injury (AKI). 
Localized infection of the brain can lead to loss or attenuation of olfaction, 
muscular pain, headaches, encephalopathy, dizziness, dysgeusia, psychomotor 
disorders, and stroke; while the gastrointestinal symptoms include the 
disruption of the normal intestinal mucosa, leading to diarrhea and abdominal 
pain. This review encompassed a topical streak of systemic malfunctions caused 
by the SARS-CoV-2 infection. As the pandemic is still in progress, more studies 
will enrich our understanding and analysis of this disease.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2021.112158
PMCID: PMC8416601
PMID: 34507116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Annu Rev Biophys. 2021 May 6;50:493-523. doi: 
10.1146/annurev-biophys-102620-080956.

The Contribution of Biophysics and Structural Biology to Current Advances in 
COVID-19.

Barrantes FJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Research Institute (BIOMED), Catholic University of Argentina 
(UCA)-National Scientific and Technical Research Council, Argentina (CONICET), 
C1107AFF Buenos Aires, Argentina; email: francisco_barrantes@uca.edu.ar.

Critical to viral infection are the multiple interactions between viral proteins 
and host-cell counterparts. The first such interaction is the recognition of 
viral envelope proteins by surface receptors that normally fulfil other 
physiological roles, a hijacking mechanism perfected over the course of 
evolution. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the 
etiological agent of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), has successfully 
adopted this strategy using its spike glycoprotein to dock on the membrane-bound 
metalloprotease angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). The crystal structures 
of several SARS-CoV-2 proteins alone or in complex with their receptors or other 
ligands were recently solved at an unprecedented pace. This accomplishment is 
partly due to the increasing availability of data on other coronaviruses and 
ACE2 over the past 18 years. Likewise, other key intervening actors and 
mechanisms of viral infection were elucidated with the aid of biophysical 
approaches. An understanding of the various structurally important motifs of the 
interacting partners provides key mechanistic information for the development of 
structure-based designer drugs able to inhibit various steps of the infective 
cycle, including neutralizing antibodies, small organic drugs, and vaccines. 
This review analyzes current progress and the outlook for future structural 
studies.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-biophys-102620-080956
PMID: 33957057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Signal Transduct Target Ther. 2021 Jun 9;6(1):226. doi: 
10.1038/s41392-021-00644-x.

Fast-spreading SARS-CoV-2 variants: challenges to and new design strategies of 
COVID-19 vaccines.

Zhou W(1), Wang W(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, 
Sichuan University, and Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, Chengdu, 
PR China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, 
Sichuan University, and Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, Chengdu, 
PR China. weiwang@scu.edu.cn.

DOI: 10.1038/s41392-021-00644-x
PMCID: PMC8187888
PMID: 34108440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


94. Int J Biol Sci. 2021 Apr 10;17(6):1600-1612. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.58906. 
eCollection 2021.

From impossible to possible: the lessons from the control of recent COVID-19 
outbreaks in China.

Tai L(1)(2), Wong K(1)(2), Wang L(1)(3), Di LJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Cancer center, Faculty of health sciences, University of Macau.
(2)Institute of translational medicine, Faculty of health sciences, University 
of Macau.
(3)Metabolomics core, Faculty of health sciences, University of Macau.

The COVID-19 pandemic has catastrophically impacted the world. Before the 
success in vaccination, this virus shows no sign of stop spreading. Nearly all 
the countries have implemented stringent approaches to slow down the 
transmission of the virus, but the virus still caused over 2 million deaths and 
the number is increasing. Therefore, preventing the virus spreading is still 
necessary to protect most people, especially the ones with pre-conditions. 
Mainland China has successfully eradicated the COVID-19 virus infection in Wuhan 
in 2020. After that, several small-scale outbreaks occurred in many cities in 
China, but none of these COVID-19 virus infections caused the widespread. In 
this review, we would like to give a detailed presentation of the approaches 
that were implemented by the China government to suppress the virus spreading by 
considering the unique characteristics of this virus and the paths of the virus 
transmission. Both the pros and cons of these strategies will also be analyzed. 
The experiences and lessons learned during the virus-fighting in China, 
expectedly, will be a useful source of reference for other regions in overcoming 
the threat caused by the COVID-19 virus.

© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/ijbs.58906
PMCID: PMC8071760
PMID: 33907524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.


95. Nature. 2021 Apr;592(7855):500-501. doi: 10.1038/d41586-021-00996-y.

India's COVID-vaccine woes - by the numbers.

Padma TV.

DOI: 10.1038/d41586-021-00996-y
PMID: 33854229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Biomed Pharmacother. 2021 May;137:111300. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2021.111300. 
Epub 2021 Jan 28.

Stem cell therapy in COVID-19: Pooled evidence from SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV, 
MERS-CoV and ARDS: A systematic review.

Mahendiratta S(1), Bansal S(2), Sarma P(3), Kumar H(4), Choudhary G(5), Kumar 
S(6), Prakash A(7), Sehgal R(8), Medhi B(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research, Chandigarh, India. Electronic address: 
saniya.mahendiratta88@gmail.com.
(2)Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, India. 
Electronic address: 2006.seema@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research, Chandigarh, India. Electronic address: phulen10@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research, Chandigarh, India. Electronic address: hkumar98@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Pharmacology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research, Chandigarh, India. Electronic address: gajendra809@gmail.com.
(6)PGIMER, Chandigarh, India. Electronic address: subodhbiotech@gmail.com.
(7)Department of Pharmacology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research, Chandigarh, India. Electronic address: ajayprakashpgi@gmail.com.
(8)Dept. of Parasitology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research, Chandigarh, India. Electronic address: sehgalpgi@gmail.com.
(9)Department of Pharmacology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research, Chandigarh, India. Electronic address: drbikashus@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: SARS-CoV-2, which majorly affects the lungs and respiratory tract is 
thought due to dysregulation of the immune system which causes an immense 
imbalance of the cytokines. However, till now no standard treatment has been 
developed in treating the disease. On the other hand, it becomes important to 
prevent the acute respiratory tract infection due to COVID-19 which is the most 
dangerous phase leading to increased mortality. Hence this systematic review has 
been framed by pooling the available data of the use of stem cells in 
SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV and ARDS.
METHODS: 6 literature databases (PubMed, EMBASE, Scopus, Google Scholar, 
Clinicaltrials.gov, and Clinical trial registry of India) were searched for 
relevant studies till 10th August 2020 using keywords stem cells, mesenchymal 
stem cells, cell therapy, SARS CoV-2, SARS Coronavirus, Coronavirus 2, COVID-19, 
nCoV-19, Novel Coronavirus, MERS CoV, ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome.
RESULTS: The observations of this systematic review suggest capability of MSCs 
in reducing the systemic inflammation and protecting against SARS-CoV-2 as 
evidenced by the available clinical data.
CONCLUSION: MSCs can overcome the clinical challenges currently faced by 
SARS-CoV-2 infected patients, specifically who are seriously ill and not 
responding to conventional therapies. Though the available clinical data is 
motivating, still predicting the therapeutic potential of MSCs will be too early 
in COVID-19. Hence, further studies in a larger cohort of patients becomes a 
prerequisite to validate their potential efficacy.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2021.111300
PMCID: PMC7843034
PMID: 33529945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.


97. Curr Mol Med. 2021;21(6):441-456. doi: 10.2174/1566524020999201117120147.

Addressing the Importance of Stem Cell-Based Therapy: A Perspective in the 
Treatment of COVID-19.

Ibrahim C(1), Semaan H(1), El-Sabban M(2), Najjar F(3), Hamade A(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire d'Innovation Therapeutique, "Stem cell, Organogenesis and 
Regenerative Medicine" Master Program, Lebanese University, Faculty of Sciences, 
Beirut, Lebanon.
(2)Department of Anatomy, Cell Biology and Physiological Sciences, Faculty of 
Medicine, American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon.
(3)Laboratoire d'Innovation Thérapeutique, Departments of Biology, Chemistry and 
Biochemistry, Lebanese University, Faculty of Sciences II, Fanar, Lebanon.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome-associated coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is an 
extremely pathogenic virus belonging to the family of Coronaviridae. First 
identified in Wuhan, China in December 2019 after an epidemiological 
investigation of an emerging cluster of pneumonia of unknown etiology, 
SARS-CoV-2 was declared the cause of a pandemic on March 11 by the World Health 
Organization (WHO), pointing to the over 118000 cases of Coronavirus disease 
2019 (COVID-19) in over 110 countries. Despite the promising results of drug 
repositioning studies in the treatment of COVID-19, the evidence of their safety 
and efficacy remains inconclusive. Cell based therapy has been proven safe and 
possibly effective in treating multiple lung injuries and diseases, but its 
potential use in the treatment of COVID-19 has not been yet elucidated. Our aim 
in this review is to provide an overview of the immunomodulatory effect and the 
regenerative capacity of stem cells and their secretome in the treatment of many 
diseases including lung injuries. Those findings may contribute to a better 
understanding of the potential of stem cell therapy in SARS-CoV-2 infection and 
its potential use in order to find a solution for this healthcare crisis.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1566524020999201117120147
PMID: 33208076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mol Cell Biochem. 2021 Nov;476(11):3987-4002. doi: 10.1007/s11010-021-04217-y. 
Epub 2021 Jun 30.

A brief molecular insight of COVID-19: epidemiology, clinical manifestation, 
molecular mechanism, cellular tropism and immuno-pathogenesis.

Singh S(1), Pandey R(1), Tomar S(1), Varshney R(2), Sharma D(1)(3), Gangenahalli 
G(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Stem Cell and Gene Therapy, Institute of Nuclear Medicine and 
Allied Sciences, Brig. S. K. Mazumdar Road, Delhi, 110054, India.
(2)Division of Cyclotron and Radiopharmaceutical Sciences, Institute of Nuclear 
Medicine and Allied Sciences, Brig. S. K. Mazumdar Road, Delhi, 110054, India.
(3)Meerut Institute of Engineering and Technology, Meerut, India.
(4)Division of Stem Cell and Gene Therapy, Institute of Nuclear Medicine and 
Allied Sciences, Brig. S. K. Mazumdar Road, Delhi, 110054, India. 
gurudutta.inmas@gmail.com.

In December 2019, the emergence and expansion of novel and infectious 
respiratory virus SARS-CoV-2 originated from Wuhan, China caused an 
unprecedented threat to the public health and became a global pandemic. 
SARS-CoV-2 is an enveloped, positive sense and single stranded RNA virus 
belonging to genera betacoronavirus, of Coronaviridae family. The viral genome 
sequencing studies revealed 75-80% similarity with SARS-CoV. SARS-CoV-2 mainly 
affects the lower respiratory system and may progress to pneumonia and Acute 
Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS). Apart from life-threatening situations and 
burden on the global healthcare system, the COVID-19 pandemic has imposed 
several challenges on the worldwide economics and livelihood. The novel pathogen 
is highly virulent, rapidly mutating and has a tendency to cross the species 
boundaries such as from bats to humans through the evolution and natural 
selection from intermediate host. In this review we tried to summarize the 
overall picture of SARS-CoV-2 including origin/ emergence, epidemiology, 
pathogenesis, genome organization, comparative analysis with other CoVs, 
infection and replication mechanism along with cellular tropism and 
immunopathogenesis which will provide a brief panoramic view about the virus and 
disease.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11010-021-04217-y
PMCID: PMC8244678
PMID: 34195882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


99. Transfus Apher Sci. 2020 Oct;59(5):102933. doi: 10.1016/j.transci.2020.102933. 
Epub 2020 Sep 3.

Update on newer approaches to prevent or treat COVID-19 infection: What we all 
need the most right now!!

Seghatchian J(1), Acker JP(2), Putter JS(3).

Author information:
(1)International Consultancy in Strategic Safety/ Quality Innovations of Blood- 
Derived Bioproducts and Quality Audit / Inspection, London, England, UK.
(2)Centre for Innovation, Canadian Blood Services, Edmonton, AB, Canada; 
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, AB, Canada. Electronic address: jason.acker@blood.ca.
(3)Medical Biomechanics Inc., San Marcos, CA USA.

COVID-19 convalescent plasma (CCP) therapy involves the use of circulating 
antibodies administration from recovered COVID 19 patients as a practical 
strategy to provide immediate passive immunity in susceptible recipients in 
need. Global concern over the potential for "second" or "third" waves of 
infection to occur before effective vaccines or drug therapies are available has 
many looking at other biological sources for large-scale production of 
neutralizing SARS-CoV-2 antibodies. This report summarizes some of the novel 
strategies for developing alternative safe sources of therapeutic autologous 
antibodies from COVID -19 infected patients, and provides some original thoughts 
on how to rapidly implement a safe passive immunity in those COVID-19 patients 
who are most in need of intervention. COVID-19 antibodies can be isolated or 
delivered using a number of other techniques including: plasmapheresis, plasma 
cryoprecipitate reduced (cryosupernatant), antibody hyperconcentrates and 
advanced cell-based delivery systems. While these proposed technological options 
may, in some cases, be theoretical, the growing concern over the rapid spread of 
the SARS-CoV-2 virus has prompted many to pursue innovative and creative 
solutions to reduce the mortality and morbidity resulting from the current 
global pandemic. A comparative analysis of various strategies currently in use 
deserved exploring and this highlighted separately as the essential part of this 
concise theme.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.transci.2020.102933
PMCID: PMC7470817
PMID: 32919879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Biomed Pharmacother. 2021 May;137:111363. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2021.111363. 
Epub 2021 Feb 5.

Induced dysregulation of ACE2 by SARS-CoV-2 plays a key role in COVID-19 
severity.

Mehrabadi ME(1), Hemmati R(2), Tashakor A(3), Homaei A(4), Yousefzadeh M(5), 
Hemati K(6), Hosseinkhani S(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Shahrekord University, 
Sharekord, Iran.
(2)Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Shahrekord University, 
Sharekord, Iran; Biotechnology Research Institute, Shahrekord University, 
Shahrekord, Iran; COVID-19 research group, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Shahrekord 
Univesity, Shahrekord, Iran. Electronic address: Roohullah.hemmati@sku.ac.ir.
(3)Irish Centre for Vascular Biology, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, 
Dublin, Ireland; School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Sciences, Royal College of 
Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland.
(4)Department of Marine Biology, Faculty of Marine Science and Technology, 
University of Hormozgan, Bandar Abbas, Iran.
(5)Department of Biology, Payame Noor University Of Najafabad, Isfahan, Iran.
(6)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain, Iran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.
(7)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Tarbiat Modares 
University, Tehran, Iran.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2), the cause of 
COVID-19, is reported to increase the rate of mortality worldwide. COVID-19 is 
associated with acute respiratory symptoms as well as blood coagulation in the 
vessels (thrombosis), heart attack and stroke. Given the requirement of 
angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor for SARS-CoV-2 entry into host 
cells, here we discuss how the downregulation of ACE2 in the COVID-19 patients 
and virus-induced shift in ACE2 catalytic equilibrium, change the concentrations 
of substrates such as angiotensin II, apelin-13, dynorphin-13, and products such 
as angiotensin (1-7), angiotensin (1-9), apelin-12, dynorphin-12 in the human 
body. Substrates accumulation ultimately induces inflammation, angiogenesis, 
thrombosis, neuronal and tissue damage while diminished products lead to the 
loss of the anti-inflammatory, anti-thrombotic and anti-angiogenic responses. In 
this review, we focus on the viral-induced imbalance between ACE2 substrates and 
products which exacerbates the severity of COVID-19. Considering the roadmap, we 
propose multiple therapeutic strategies aiming to rebalance the products of ACE2 
and to ameliorate the symptoms of the disease.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2021.111363
PMCID: PMC7862910
PMID: 33582450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.